Amphisbaena alba	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A large, blunt-nosed form of Amphisbaena without fusion of head segments, unicolored when adult, with a high number of segments to a midbody annulus, and lacking a caudal autotomy constriction. Specimens have 198 to 248 body annuli; 13 to 21 caudal annuli; 65 to 85 (30-42 dorsal; 35-46 ventral) segments per midbody annulus; and four to 10 precloacal pores.  (Gans 1962)DESCRIPTION: Meristic data for Brazilian specimens are cited from Vanzolini (1955). Counts by me on non-Brazilian specimens fall within. these ranges. Figures 4 through 6 show views of heads of juvenile and adult; figures 2 and 3, the juvenile color pattern; and figures 1 and 7, the ventral surfaces of cloaca and tail. Preserved specimens are a uniformn yellow-tan, brown, or brownish pink dorsally and slightly lighter ventrally. Juveniles may have a dorsal pattern of irregular darker spots (figs. 2, 3). There is no tendency toward darkening of the segmental centers. For a colored photograph of a live specimen, see Schmidt and Inger (1957, fig. 57). The head scalation shows considerable variability and is often asymmetrical (cf. Brongersma, 1932). The description (following Gans and Alexander, MS) is hence of the general pattern, almost all elements of which have been observed to vary in one specimen or another. An azygous rostral is followed by three pairs of enlarged cephalic shields in contact along the dorsal midline, with the nostrils pierced in the first pair (nasals). The second pair (prefrontals) are the largest segments of the head. There are four supralabials and three infralabials. The first three supralabials are large, and particularly the third one may be split in some individuals (fig. 4). The first two pairs of infralabials are large. The third is narrow and generally widest at its posterior end. There is a single row of temporal (postocular) segments, varying in number, and lying between the fourth supralabial and the frontal. The T-shaped mental is followed by a slightly larger, heart-shaped postmental, often in point contact posterolaterally with a pair of large malars. There are normally two segments in the first postgenial, and two to three in the second postgenial, row. The number of the latter may be increased to five or more by a splitting off of the posteromedial corners of the malars. There is a row of from 12 to 15 postmalars. The snout is blunt, flattened slightly dorsoventrally, and oval in cross section. The upper jaw projects beyond the lower which inserts between the projecting supralabials. The shape of the head is strongly affected by the allometric growth pattern of the temporal musculature (contrast fig. 5 and fig. 6, middle view). The skin bulges away from the skull in the temporal region to an extent sufficient to produce a convex curvature just posterior to the eyes. The middorsal line is more closely attached to the parietal crest of the supraoccipital, so that adults also show a depression between the bulging temporal muscles. One to two dorsal half-annuli insert after the first or second body annulus. The first six to eight annuli are narrowed, and the sixth annulus generally marks the level of the head joint, which is apparent by a noticeable but not conspicuous constriction. The dorsal grooves are poorly defined except on the head and tail. The ventral groove is indicated mainly as a gap between aligned segments. The lateral grooves are well defined, starting gradually after the first fifth of the body. They are often crossed with diagonal fold lines that seem to facilitate adjustment of the skin when the body is twisted. The dorsal segments are much narrower than long; the ventral ones are square at midbody. The precloacal pores lie in a single uninterrupted row of normal-sized or slightly wider segments anterior to the precloacal shield. The precloacals generally number more than 10 elongate, parallel-sided segments. The postcloacals, slightly greater in number, are characterized by a central group of two to four enlarged segments, flanked on each side by a group of very narrow segments, the deep sutures between which enter the cloaca laterally as a series of parallel cross lines. The cloaca may be entirely prolapsed. The tail is of constant diameter up to the blunt end, which is capped by a group of segments with decreased intersegmental differentiation (Gans 1962).
Amphisbaena anaemariae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small species (maximum total length 193 mm). Two preanal pores; 156-170 body annuli; 18-20 tail annuli; autotomy level between third and fourth or between fourth and fifth caudal annuli; 14-16/14-16 segments to a mid-body annulus. (Vanzolini 1997)Description: Body moderately stocky. Tail slightly clavate. Lateral sulci little marked. No dorsal or ventral sulci. Sutures on the dorsal aspect of the head in the following order of increasing length: nasal, frontal, pre- frontal. Parietals and occipitals irregular. Nostril near the antero-inferior angle of the nasal. Upper labials four, second and third large, subequal. Behind the eye two successive rows of three scales each, becoming larger from the bottom up. Symphysial small, in some specimens irregular. Post-symphysial narrow, elongate, somewhat irregular. Lower labials four, the first small, the second very large, the third narrow and elongate, its posterior end sometimes pinched off to form a fourth lower labial. Two median genials (sensu Vanzolini, 1991): a variable number of post-genials; all of these very irregular; one large, regular lateral genial on each side. Dorsal segments regular, narrow and elongate. Medio-ventral segments once and a half as wide as long. Preanal pores two, very small. Six preanal scales, the outer ones very small. Postanals forming a raised semicircle. The first median pair of ventral caudals in some specimens much enlarged. Autotomy constriction between the third and fourth or the fourth and fifth tail annuli. Back a lustrous brown with slightly lighter intersegmental sutures, light enough to cause a just noticeable reticulate pattern. On the flanks and belly there are segments with a dark center and light edges, irregularly distributed and varying in density: the general appearance of the belly varies from practically white to a brown checkerboard. The ventral aspect of the tail may also be a checkerboard, or may present longitudinal series of 5-10 light segments, or still be almost white. All this variation in eight specimens. Rostral, nasals, upper labials and chin region smudgy rose-colored. (Vanzolini 1997)
Amphisbaena angustifrons	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A medium to large-sized species of Amphisbaena, with the post-rostral head shields paired and without major fusions of head shields; with an elongate, acutely pointed head, terminating in a narrow, faintly spatulate tip, and with a short, conically reduced tail that lacks an autotomy annulus and cannot be autotomized. Specimens have 190 to 215 (occasionally to 253) body annuli; 12 to 18 caudal annuli; and means of 20 to 31 dorsal and 21 to 30 ventral segments to a midbody annulus. Four, rarely three, five, or six precloacal pores. Living specimens brownish above, lighter below, with reddish purple overtones. Pigmentation appearing concentrated along anterior portions of segments which are otherwise evenly colored. (Gans 1965)DESCRIPTION: The characteristics of the Mendoza, La Pampa, and Neuquen specimens are given in parentheses when they differ from those of the rest of the material. Meristic characters are summarized in table 1. Figure 5 shows views of the head; figure 6, the ventral surface of the tail; and figures 7, 8, 9, and 10 show photographs of segment proportions and pattern details. Figures 2 and 3 show relative tail length and size variation. This is a medium to large, robust species of Amphisbaena, in life of uniform dark brown dorsal and somewhat lighter ventral coloration. The segmental pigmentation is uniform except for the marked increase in its density on the anterior part of each segment. Countershading occurs by the fading out of the pigment on the posterior half of a segment, and the differential becomes more noticeable on preserved specimens. The rostral tip, the ventral part of the supralabials, and the middle of the chin shields are light colored in life and bleach to white in preservatives. The ventral countershading is less marked along the first tenth of the body and beneath the tail. The head segments show no major fusions. The middorsal segments of the first rows following the frontals are of regular size, without significant enlargement. The head is pointed and slopes in a straight line at an acute angle toward the rostral tip, which is faintly spatulate horizontally, much like a horizontally cylindrical swollen edge. This slope is covered by the enlarged nasal, prefrontal, and frontal shields. The rostral edge and the anterior portion of these shields often give the impression of a faintly keratinized surface. The head is somewhat smaller than the trunk, set off slightly by the reduction of the nape posterior to the bulging temporal muscles. The nuchal region widens markedly at the level of the twentieth to thirtieth body annulus where the trunk achieves its greatest diameter. The trunk is subcylindrical in cross section and shows slight horizontal compression. In size the rostral is approximately equal to the first supralabial, these segments sharing a very short common suture. In dorsal view the rostral appears as a tiny triangle, if at all. Ventrally, it covers an area greater than that of the mental. Pairs of large nasals, much larger prefrontals, and smaller frontals follow in sequence along the dorsal midline of the head. The frontals may be divided by a pair of sutures that form a posteriorly acute angle with the midline. Various modifications occur, and some specimens have the sutures which end blindly in the frontals. The dorsal segments of the first body annulus may be slightly enlarged, but never sufficiently to be considered parietals. The frontals thus extend posteriorly to a level anterior to the start of the temporal bulges, which is equivalent to the middle of the third supralabial. There are four, rarely three, supralabials, the second the largest, the first, third, and fourth following in order of size. The fourth supralabial is generally a small, triangular segment cut off from the third; in cases in which only three supralabials are present, the suture is interrupted. Occasionally, as in one side of the holotype, the third supralabial is split by an ascending suture that divides off a wedge-shaped labial segment from the main portion of the shield. The first, second, and third interlabial sutures run anterodorsad at angles of 30 degrees, 45 degrees, and 45 degrees, respectively, to the labial edge. The fourth suture runs posterodorsad at 60 degrees. The ocular is more or less rectangular and is in contact with the second and third supralabials and prefrontal. It is in point contact with the frontal and in posterior contact with one or two enlarged segments of the first body annulus. The eye is large and clearly apparent. The lower jaw is fairly shallow and inserted within the prognathous snout. The mental is relatively small, flanked on each side by the some- what larger first infralabials which enclose the anterior aspect of the larger pentagonal postmental. The second of the three infralabials is by far the largest (its medial tip is separated by a suture in some specimens); the third is the smallest. The malars are subtriangular, generally equivalent in area to the first infralabials, but of varying proportions. A pair of large drop-shaped or halfmoon-shaped segments of the first postgenial row surrounds the posterior aspect of the postmental, keep- ing it from contact with the malars. An occasionally enlarged median segment' of the first postgenial row in some cases projects to touch the postmental on the midline. The second postgenial row consists of two to four small central segments, flanked on each side by equivalent sized ones, giving the impression that they were cut off the posteromedial corners of the malars. Thus the total row numbers from four to seven, normally five, segments, of which the ventral one is often enlarged. The row is lacking in some of the specimens (including all three from Esquina Grande, Catamarca). The postmalar row contains nine to 14, normally 10 or 11, more or less regular, small segments. Dorsally the first body annulus sweeps forward to include the two enlarged, roughly rectangular segments, formerly referred to as temporal and postocular. A few specimens from the southwest have the postmalar row continuing dorsal to include the fourth supralabial, temporals, and postocular. There are one to two dorsal, intercalated half annuli in the nuchal region. These are generally inserted between the first and second and the second and third body annuli. The suture be tween the third and fourth body annuli passes vertically; all anterior ones incline anterodorsad. The midventral segments of the first six to eight body annuli are smaller and rounded, forming a more or less flexible throat region that appears concave in most preserved specimens. Some specimens show the twentieth to fiftieth annuli in a smooth, somewhat posteriorly concave curve in dorsal view.There are 190 to 215 (210 to 253) body annuli from the level of the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacals. There are 20 to 31 dorsal and 20 to 30 (means of 21 to 30) ventral segments to a midbody annulus. The variation here is remarkable in that there may be a difference of two to three between adjacent annuli. The dorsal surface also bears varied diagonal folding lines that cross the segments for varying distances. The dorsal segments are incompletely rectangular, and tiny equilateral triangular segments interdigitate between them on their posterior sutures, and there are traces of very tiny segments in the sutures of body annuli. The cloacal region is characterized by three to six (usually four) small, round, precloacal pores found even in juveniles and females, six to 10 precloacal segments, of which the six central ones are by far the largest, and 12 to 20 postcloacals, of which only the central pair is widened. The cloacal region corresponds to three to four, rarely and asymmetrically two, lateral annuli. It is followed by one to three, often rather narrow, postcloacal annuli which are the first of a total series of 12 to 18 (16 to 18) caudal annuli that extends to the vertically oval caudal tip. There is no trace of an autotomy annulus; none of the specimens had an autotomized tail, and the tail of the living specimen would not autotomize. In section the tail appears ventrally flattened, dorsally curved, and wider than high, except for the distal tip which has a vertically oval cross section. The lateral sulci are clearly marked after approximately the thirty-. fifth body annulus and continue up to the level of the cloaca. They are as wide as or wider than a bordering segment and filled with irregularly shaped segmental fragments. There is barely a trace of a dorsal sulcus, and, where present, it is expressed as an alignment of intersegmental sutures. The ventral sulcus is similarly indicated. The middorsal segments are one and three-quarters to two times as long as wide. The midventral segments are wider than long, but there is marked size variability from annulus to annulus and even from side to side (Gans 1965).Diagnosis: Gans 1972: 12; for details on geographic variation see Gans 1965: 5, 13.Original description (knighti): Parker 1928: 383
Amphisbaena arenaria	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Preanal pores 4, separated on the middle by two segments, fused with those immediately behind, which are part of the anal flap. Body annuli 195; tail annuli 27, autotomy level at 6; segments to a midbody annulus 14/14. Four upper, three lower labiais. (Vanzolini 1991).Description: An apparently small species (only specimen known 195mm body length). Head acuminate, curved in profile, maximum curvature on the nasal scales. Sutures between prefrontals very short, due to the suture between these scales and the nasals being S-shaped and converging behind on the midline. Frontals very broad, with all sutures rounded. Parientals large, trapezoidal, the medial side short. Ocular four-sided, the posterior sides short, forming an obtuse angle, the anterior ones elongate, forming an acute angle; touching the frontal above. Four upper labiais, second largest but not by much, fourth very small, second and third relatively narrow and high, nestling the ocular above; the second labial touching the prefrontal. One very large postocular: behind this another large squarish trapezoidal scale, resting on the fourth labial. Nostril near the naso-frontal suture. Symphysial roughly anvil-shaped, broader in front, with transverse posterior margin. Postsymphysial roughly polygonal, between 5- and 7-sided. Three lower labiais, first large, subtriangular; second a little larger still; third low and elongate, fused with the lateral genial on the left side. Lateral genials very large. Anterior medial genials two, large, embracing the post-symphysial; lateral medial genials two, small, posteriorly on a level with the medial scales, but reaching forward only about halfway. Post-genials 8, behind them 4 rows of scales of which the 2-4 median elements are irregular, swollen.Body without dorsal or ventral sulci. Lateral sulci beginning about 4 annuli behind the head, as an area of 4-6 badly broken up segments; this extends for some 15-20 annuli, after which it disappears, to become evident again at about the 60th annulus, with normal morphology. Dorsal sulcus disappears, segments slightly longer than wide, poorly aligned. Ventral segments wider than the dorsals, better aligned.Anal flap with 8 scales, progressively larger toward the middle; the two central elements fused with the corresponding segments of the last body annulus, resulting in two elongate scales separating the porebearing scales, 2 on each side. Pores on the hind margin of the segments, small but rounded and well defined. Postanal rim with 10-12 swollen short scales.Tail cylindrical, with well marked annuli and segments, except at the tip, which is smooth, acuminate. The sixth caudal annulus is slightly shorter than the others, indicating the level of autotomy. (Vanzolini 1991).Coloration: uniform light yellow. (Vanzolini 1991).
Amphisbaena bakeri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size large (SVL to 260 mm); tail to 21 mm, cylindrical, roundedterminally; no caudal autotomy; body annuli 239-255, caudal annuli 14-16; dorsal segments (= scale rows) 14-16/midbody annulus, ventral segments 16-17/midbody annulus; rows of postgenials 2; no postmalar chin shields; 4 precloacal pores; nasal suture long, more than one-third prefrontal suture; no temporal. Dorsum pinkish gray, gray, or light brown, darker and more uniform on upper surface of head and tail; rectangular centers of each segment much darker than margins, giving impression of pattern of dark spots; color darker dorsally than pinkish venter; chin and varying portions of venter with light-colored segments lacking dark rectangles, not due to fading but rather to absence along margins of light-colored regions (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 555).Detailed description: Gans & Alexander 1962: 121, Stejneger 1904.
Amphisbaena barbouri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A form of Amphisbaena with the ocular fused to the second supralabial. Specimens have 226 to 240 body annuli ; 14 to 18 caudal annuli; 12 to 14 dorsal and 16 to 18 ventral segments per midbody annulus ; two postgenial and no postmalar rows of chin shields ; and 4 to 6 precloacal pores. None of ourspecimens shows caudal autotomy. (Gans & Alexander 1962).Description: Meristic characters are given in Gans & Alexander 1962 (Table 1 and Figures 7, 8 and 12), individual data in the appendix. Plate 5 shows views of the holotype.
Amphisbaena bolivica	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Definición y descripción dada por Gans (1965) excepto: más de 206 Anillos del cuerpo; si son menos entonces la suma de anillos del cuerpo y de la cola en mayor de 223; anillos caudales de 18 a 26; siempre menos de 72 escamas alrededor en un anillo del medio del cuerpo (de 54 a 71 escamas, 27-36 dorsales, 2636 ventrales); cabeza totalmente blanca, obscura o con banda blanca (Montero 1996).REMARKS: Amphisbaena boliviana fue descripta por Werner (1910). Según Gans (op. cit) aparentemente los sintipos se destruyeron. El número de escamas alrededor del medio del cuerpo de A. boliviana es 32-30/28 30. Los números de anillos dados en la desc- ión original (195/201 + 22/23), encuadra a A. boliviana Werner en lo que aquí definimos como A. camura Cope por lo que se mantiene en su sinonimia Amphisbaena camura bolivica fue descripta por Mertens (1929) en base a dos ejemplares (uno completo y uno incompleto) de Villa Montes, sobre el Río Pilcomayo, Bolivia El sintipo completo tiene la cola autotomizada. Según el número de anillos corporales (217 según la descripción original, 212 según Gans; es posible que la diferencia se deba a la forma de contar los anillos, que Alexander y Gans [1960] estan darizaron, por lo que preferimos el valor de Gans) este taxón corresponde al ensamble occidental del complejo camura, y que aquí lo revalidamos elevándolo a categoría de especie. La diagnosis y descripción de A. camura (sensu lato) brindada por Gans (1965) es válida para las especies que aquí tratamos, excepto en los caracteres que las diferencian y que se brindan en las respectivas diagnosis. (Montero 1996)
Amphisbaena caeca	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size large (SVL to 291 mm [male]); tail to 22 mm, cylindrical, ta-pering, rounded terminally; caudal autotomy uncommon, mostly after fifth caudal annulus; body annuli 214-237, caudal annuli 13-18; dorsal segments 13-18/midbody annulus, ventral segments 14-20/midbody annulus; rows of post-genials 2-3 (strongly modally 2); 0-1 (strongly modally 1) rows of postmalar chin shields; 4-6 (mode 4) precloacal pores; nasal suture very short, one-fifth or less of prefrontal suture; 0-2 (mode 1) temporals. Dorsum pinkish brown, completely so on head and tail; on body, rectangular centers of segments much darker than margins, giving dark-spotted appearance; dorsum darker than venter; venter at times with whitish stripe from cloaca anteriorly to one-third or one-half body (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 555).
Amphisbaena camura	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS:A large-sized species of Amphisbaena with postrostral head shields paired, and without major fusions of head shields; with a short pointed head terminating in a rounded vertically oval tip; and with a relatively short, terminally rounded tail. Specimens having 194 to 217 body annuli; 14 to 26 caudal annuli; an autotomy annulus generally at fourth or fifth caudal; means of 28 to 42 dorsal and 27 to 45 ventral segments to a midbody annulus. Generally four to six precloacal pores or pore scars. Specimens brown above, lighter below, with segments pigmented uniformly and color gradually fading out along sides. Specimens having a light-colored nuchal band that may in some populations be obscured in adults or extended to cover snout. Meristic, size, and pattern characters showing marked geographic variation within above limits (cf. figs. 2, 3, and 4). (from Gans 1965: 22)Detailed DESCRIPTION: Gans 1965: 22.Description (boliviana): Werner 1910: 35
Amphisbaena carlgansi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Three Cuban species, Amphisbaena cubana, A. barbouri, and A. carlgansi, share a major fusion of head scales (ocular + second supralabial) not found in other Antillean species of the genus (Gans and Alexander, 1962). Therefore it is appropriate to compare A. carlgansi with A. cubana and A. barbouri. Of the three species, A. carlgansi is most similar to A. barbouri and thus the diagnostic differences distinguishing A. barbouri from A. cubana also distinguish A. carlgansi from A. cubana. Most notably, A. barbouri and A. carlgansi are smaller and more slender species with higher numbers of body and caudal annuli and lower interfrontal/interprefrontal and intemasal/ interprefrontal ratios (Table 1). The most relevant comparison of A. carlgansi is with its presumed closest relative A. barbouri. The two species can be separated by a combination of the following characters: tail length/ SVL (0.080-0.086 in carlgansi, 0.060-0.079 in barbouri) (Fig. 3), coloration (pale pinkish-tan in carlgansi, medium brown in barbouri), number of body annuli (212-228 [x̅ = 219] in carlgansi, 226-240 [x̅ = 233] in barbouri), and total midbody segments (31-34 [mode = 32] in carlgansi, 28-32 [mode = 30, 31] in barbouri) (Table 1). (Thomas & Hedges 1998). DESCRIPTION. Size to 168 mm SVL (Total length 182 mm); body annuli 216-228 (x̅ = 221); lateral annuli 2/2-3/3; caudal annuli 14-16, autonomy plane not evident; segments to a midbody annulus 14/18-20; 7-8 precloacals; 11-13 postcloacals; 4 precloacal pores; total half-annular segments of head 4-8; chin segments 3 + 4; 4 + 4; or 3 + 5. Head narrow, not sharply distinct from neck; rostral triangular, apical in position, not fused with nasals, nor inserting between them other than as a broad apical wedge; nasals in broad sutural contact; prefrontals large, trapezoidal in broad sutural contact; frontals roughly trapezoidal, in broad sutural contact along bases; parietals asymmetrically trapezoidal with bases contacting third median segments of third body annulus; median segments of third body annulus somewhat enlarged, forming second parietals; extra half-annulus in head region resulting from split in dorsal part of second body annulus; total half-annular segments, including parietals 4 (2 + 2), 7 (3 + 4), or 8 (4 + 4 or 3 + 5); first supralabial small, subtriangular; second supralabial large, almost chevronate with uper portion consisting of fused ocular scale; weak indications of line of fusion present; third supralabial small, roughly pentagonal. Mental broadly arrow-shaped with curved first infralabial suture; first infralabial small, subquadrangular with wide base on labial border; second infralabial large, irregularly hexagonal with wide base along labial border, about 2/3 as wide as long, third infralabial small, trapezoidal; malar a right pentagonal, about 2/3 as wide as long, postmental elongate, shield-shape, subpentagonal with apex posterior, forming an 48-70 degree angle; two rows of postgenials, the first row of two enlarged teardrop-shaped scales and 1-2 much smaller triangular angular scales squeezed between then; second row of 4-5 roughly rectangular isometric scales. The dorsal coloration is pale pinkish-tan that fades gradually to a slightly paler pinkish ventral coloration with no sharp demarcation (Thomas & Hedges 1998).
Amphisbaena carvalhoi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A very small form of Amphishaena without major fusions of liead shields, with slightly enlarged first parietals, with three supra- and three infralabials; and with two postgenial and no postmalar rows. The head is slightly compressed dorsoventrally, noticeably set off from the neck and bears a regular segmentation pattern. The form has 231 to 245 body annuli; 7 to 8 caudal annuli up to the autotomy constriction (all tails are complete); 19 to 22 caudal annuli from the cloaca to the conical caudal spine; 12 to 14 dorsal and 16 to 18, generally 18, ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and four clearly expressed, small, round precloacal pores in both sexes. The color of preserved specimens is brown dorsally, fading out ventrally on the trunk. The nape and parietal aspects of the head and the dorsal surface of the tail are slightly darker. The lightened area extends across the sui)ralabials and the rostral region. Pigmentation consists of a general coloration of the dorsal segments, emphasized on the rectangular segmental centers. Laterally the margins fade, the rectangles decrease in size, and segmental drop out occurs. (Gans 1965: 625)Detailed description: Gans 1965: 625
Amphisbaena caudalis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena caudalis is a moderate-sized (to 247 mm SVL), slender, relatively short-headed, long-tailed species of Amphisbaena with caudal autotomy; it lacks major alterations of the head scales and has the Y chin configuration, has wide body annuli posteriorly, a high number of caudal annuli, and large “difference counts.” In small head size, slenderness, long tails (9-10% SVL), high caudal annuli counts, and high “difference counts,” it superficially resembles A. hyporissor but differs from that species in having the Y chin configuration, and in the broad median contact of the first pair of parietals. Caudal autotomy occurs modally at annulus six in A. caudalis and annulus five in A. hyporissor. Amphisbaena hyporissor and A. gonavensis are similar in having the M chin configuration and the tendency toward narrowing of the median contact of the first pair of parietals, but A. gonavensis has a short tail and correspondingly low caudal annular counts (10-13); it also has low “difference counts” (-2-2), which do not overlap with those of A. caudalis (Gans and Alexander 1962). Amphisbaena caudalis differs from the widespread A. innocens in being more slender (Fig. 3B in THOMAS & HEDGES 2006), having a smaller head (Fig. 3C), a strong mode of 4 scales in the second row of postgenials (vs. a strong mode of 5 in A. innocens) a shorter first infralabial (Fig. 3D), a longer tail (Fig. 3A), higher caudal annular counts (17-21 vs. 9-15), caudal autotomy, greater “difference counts” of body annuli, proportionately larger (longer) posterior body annuli, less difference in the length of the annular segments between dorsum and venter, and in proportionately larger hemipenes ornamented with larger pleats. (Thomas & Hedges 2006).
Amphisbaena cegei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small form of Amphisbaena, without major fusion of head shields, with the frontals, the largest segment on the dorsal surface, and the second infralabial, by far the largest segment on the ventral surface, with a short prognathous snout, a postmental with a medial groove, lacking a postmalar row. The form has 198 body annuli, 22 caudal annuli, a clearly marked autotomy annulus that falls on the seventh postcloacal annulus, 21 to 22 dorsal segments and 22 to 23 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and four precloacal pores, very slightly marked on the holotype. Tail base depressed; behind the autotomy annulus it becomes compressed. Tail tip conical. On the anterior third of the body dorsal pigmentation is light brown; posteriorly it becomes dark brown. On the ventral side, it is very light, but the segments are slightly pigmented, with the pigment more concentrated on the anterior part of the scale. (Montero et al. 1997)IDENTIFICATION. Among the species with four precloacal pores, Amphisbaena cegei is unique by having a high number of segments to a midbody annulus (44). Amphisbaena cegei differs from A. darwini (with the same number of precloacal pores and similar number of body annuli) by the higher number of segments to a midbody annulus (although A. d. trachura, from Brazil, has 14-21/ 17-23) and by the absence of postmalar row. From A. prunicolor (with which it shares a similar number of precloacal pores, similar number of body annuli, and the absence of postmalar row) Amphisbaena cegei differs by the elevated number of segments to a midbody annulus and different segmental pigmentation. Among the species with a similar number of segments to a midbody annulus, Amphisbaena cegei is distinguished from A. angustifrons by the shape of the snout, by the high number of caudal annuli and by having three (instead of four) supralabial shields. From A. vermicularis, A. petrei, and A. mertensi it differs by the low number of body annuli (Montero et al. 1997).
Amphisbaena crisae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small species (maximum total length 170 mm). Two preanal pores; 180-185 body annuli; 20-22 tail annuli; autotomy level between fourth and fifth or between fifth and sixth caudal annuli; 10/10 (in one case 10/11) segments to a midbody annulus.Description: Body moderately stocky. Tail varying from cylindrical, slightly tapering, to clearly but not strongly clavate. Lateral sulci thin but distinct; no dorsal or ventral sulci. Median scale sutures on the dorsal aspect of the head in the following order of increasing length: (nasal, parietal), frontal, prefrontal. Frontal irregular, with arcuate sides, at times quite elongate. Occipitals small but still differentiated. Upper labials four, second and third very large, fourth squarish, sizable. Behind the ocular an oblique row of two large polygonal scales sitting on the fourth labial. Symphysial small, with very short antero-lateral horns. Postsymphysial seven-sided, rather short and broad, fairly regular. Lower labials five, the second very large, the third to fifth forming an even longitudinal row of rectangular scales. Medial genials large. Postgenials three. Lateral genials large, with elongate anterior processes. Dorsal segments squarish, very slightly swollen. Ventral segments variable, the broadest (median) 2 to 2.5 times as broad as long. Preanal pores two, well made. Preanal scales six. Autotomy constriction between the fourth and fifth or the fifth and sixth caudal annuli. Tip of tail plainly segmented. Dorsum medium brown. Intersegmental sutures lighter, from almost inconspicuously to distinctly so, resulting at the extreme in a finely reticulate pattern, more evident on the posterior third. The segments on the flanks tend to have dark centers with lighter margins; this pattern extends onto the belly, sparing anteriorly the four median segments, invading all the venter posteriorly. Ventral aspect of tail heavily checkered. Head dorsally and ventrally the same color as the body, without lighter areas.Scale counts and body proportions: see discussion in Vanzolini 1997.
Amphisbaena cubana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size small (SVL to 197 mm); tail to 16 mm, cylindrical, tapering,rounded terminally; caudal autotomy usually after seventh caudal annulus; ocular and second supralabial usually fused; body annuli 199-240, caudal annuli 10-18; dorsal segments 12-16/midbody annulus, ventral segments 14-18/midbody annulus; rows of postgenials 2; no postmalar chin shields; precloacal scales 8; postcloacal scales 10; 4-6 (strongly modally 4) precloacal pores; nasal suture short; 1 temporal. Dorsum (as preserved) shades of brown; venter with pink to violet gloss in life; dorsal color solid on upper surface of head and tail; on body, rectangular center of each segment much darker than margin, giving impression of dark spots; color darker dorsally than ventrally; most specimens with few white segments randomly scattered over venter (less than 10% have most of venter white, color dropping out irregularly and not at given level) (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 557).
Amphisbaena cunhai	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small species of amphisbaenid (Figure 1) with a short tail. Number of body annuli 226-239, caudal annuli 25-26+ 1, scales around midbody 28-34, 14-16 dorsaIs, 14-18 ventrals; three supralabials, three infralabials, one row of postgenials, one row of postmalars, ocular small, preanal pores four, large, occupying a large part of the scales in which they are situated; no distinct autotomy constriction in tail. Head above and below pinkish, dorsum brown, belly anteriorly pink, graduaIly changing to creamish, underside of tail grey with or without white spots (Hoogmoed and Ávila-Pires 1991).DESCRIPTION: Head as wide as lhe body, slighlly depressed, posterior par! with a shallow but distinct, median dorsal sulcus. Snout rounded, blum, swollen projecting over the mouth (Figures 2-3). Rostral medium-sized, pentagonal, distinctly wider than deep, just visible from above. Three supralabials, the anterior one trapezoid; the second and third irregularly pentagonal, elongate, distinctly smaller than the first one, subequal to each other. Ocular small, trapezoid, in contact with second and third supralabials, prefrontal, frontal (narrowly), postocular, and rarely with the temporal. Postocular much larger than ocular. One trapezoid temporal, smaller than the postocular, posteriorly bordered by three scales forming par! of the first body annulus (Gans & Alexander, 1962: 78), ventrally by a small, pentagonal post-supralabial. A pair of large, quadrangular nasals in broad contact. A pair of smaller rectangular prefrontals, wider than long. A pair of trapezoid to semicircular frontais, smaller than the prefrontals. A pair of irregularly hexagonal parietals, slightly larger than the frontals. Nasal suture longer than frontal suture, which is as long as the parietal suture and longer than the prefrontal suture. Mental large, trapezoid, with straight to slightly convex posterior margin and ameriorly diverging sides; its anterior width is more than its length. Three infralabials, the first more or less trapezoid, the second also, but more elongate and of similar size, the third much smaller, rectangular, rarely divided and thus forming four infralabials. Postmental larger than the mental, irregularly octagonal, longer than wide, in narrow but distinct contact with the large malars (which are smaller than the second infralabial), followed by one row of 2-3 postgenials and another row of 7-9 (X = 8.0, n = 11) postmalars (lateral ones may be enlarged; in RMNH 24471 the median one is enlarged and extends between the postgenials). Throat with transverse rows of elongate, rectangular scales which are smaller than the ventrais. Scales on nape and side of neck similar to the dorsais, but a trifle smaller. Dorsais small, rectangular, with right angles, longer than wide, 14-16 in an annulus at rnidbody level. A distinct dorsal sulcus, with two small scales separating lhe larger dorsais, is presenl posterior1y of annulus 18-59 (mostly 45-59; only five specimens were studied for lhis character) to above the cloaca. Median ventrais larger than the dorsaIs, rectangular (wider than long); toward the sides ventrais smaller, gradually becoming longer than wide, but still larger than the dorsais, 14-18, mostly 16 in an annulus at midbody leveI. Total number of scales around midbody 28-34. A lateral sulcus separating lhe dorsais and the ventrais (Figure 5). Scales bordering on the sulcus have rounded lateral margins, the space between dorsal and ventral part of an annulus is filled by two small, oval scales. No ventral sulcus. Body annuli 224-239 (x = 231,4, n = 11) counting from the third supralabial to and including the pore-bearing precloacals, few intercalated incomplete annuli are present; three lateral annuli in the cloacal region. Precloacal pores four, transversely oval, large, occupying a large part of the scaIe in which they are situated; posterior part of porbearing scales, which are longer than wide, divided into smaller scales; 6 precloacal segments; 7-11 (mostly 7 or 8) well differentiated postcloacal segments (Figures 4-5). Caudal annuli (counting fram the first complete postcloacal annulus) 25-26 (X = 25.4, n = 7) and a divided end plate at the tip. Autotomy constriction not distinct, but the autotomy plane is recognisable at the levei of caudal annulus 5-7 (mostly 7), with tails broken after or regenerated fram annulus 7. In all specimens the autotomy annulus is distinct because of its darker colour and the scales that are larger (longer) than those in adjacent annuli. Colour in life: head dorsa11y and ventrally lavender (77), body dorsally with segments mostly hair-brown (119A), over a lavender background; body ventrally lavender; tail darker than body (colours and numbers according to Smithe, 1975). Colour in preservative: head dorsally and ventrally pink, scales of dorsum with pinkish interstices, in posterior part of body with grey, oval to rectangular, central spots, Dorsal part of tail as posterior part of body. Belly anteriorly pink, gradually changing into creamish, in posterior part of body with or without white spots. Underside of tail grey with or without white spots situated near the anterior margin of the scales. Autotomy constriction darker than adjacent annuli especially well visible ventrally. A small species with a slender cylindrica1 body and a short (ca. 1/7 or 1/8 of the snout-vent length), cylindrical tail with a bluntly pointed tipo Maximum snout-vent length 246mm (x = 199.1, n = 11), maximum tail length 34 mm (x = 25.7, n = 7) (Hoogmoed and Ávila-Pires 1991).
Amphisbaena darwinii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: This form of Amphisbaena is medium-sized, in life brownish violet dorsally and pinkish white ventrally, these colors fading to brown dorsally and off-white ventrally in preservatives. The color is expressed evenly across the dorsal segments, with occasional and faint pigment emphasis along the anterior edge or, rarely, in the center of segments. The anterior pigment emphasis (edge marking) is particularly noticeable on the sides of the trunk and on the ventral surface where the edge marking drops out by segments. The lateral countershading, in contrast, occurs by an irregular lightening of pigment area and pigment density. The dorsal surfaces of the head and tail are emphasized by darker, more dense pigmentation. The chin is light, and the light coloration extends across the infralabials onto the mental and rostral, and posteriorly to the cloaca. The third infralabial is often more darkly pigmented, and there may be a ventrad extension of the darker dorsal coloration in the nuchal region. The zone dorsola teral and posterior to the cloaca generally has faint indications of central pigment emphasis. A light, even color extends across the ventral surface of the tail, generally starting at the second postcloacal annulus; the autotomy annulus is only rarely and slightly emphasized by darker pigmentation. The head segmentation is characterized by lack of major fusions and by a pair of extremely large, roughly trapezoidal prefront als, followed by small triangular frontals, their posterior edges irregularly rounded or scalloped. The head is slightly flattened dorsoventrally and generally of oval cross-section with a variably downcurving rostral tip. The angle subtended by the sides of the face increases with age, i.e., with emphasis of the temporal musculature. These muscle masses lying over the temporal region are faintly apparent externally. The trunk nar rows slightly just posterior to the head and becomes much wider thereafter. It reaches its full width near the level of the twentieth body annulus. The rostral is slightly larger than the first supralabial. From above it is visible only as a small triangle. It occupies a slightly longer segment of the labial edge than does the mental. Pairs of medium-sized nasals, very large prefrontals, and smaller frontals form a sequence of enlarged segments along the dorsal surface of the head. The posterior edge of the frontals extends to a level that corresponds to the middle or posterior edge of the third supralabial. The parietal region is covered by irregularly subdivided segments. These are often not rectangular, but are in variably significantly smaller than the frontal. The angulus oris is often poorly defined. Minor asymmetries in labial size (and hence in labial numbers) are common. There are three supralabials, the second of these some what larger than the first and third. The first postsupralabial is very short and approximately the height of the third supralabial. The first, second, and third interlabial sutures run anterodorsally at angles of 20 degrees, 40 degrees, and 50 degrees (and the suture be tween the third supralabial and the post-supralabial runs at an angle of 30°) to the labial edge. The ocular is more or less quadrangular and is in contact with the second and third supralabials. Dorsally it is in broad contact with the prefrontal and may be in point contact with the frontal. Posteriorly it is followed by the dorsalmost (postocular) segment of the first intercalated dorsal half annulus, though the next (temporal) segment ventral to this may achieve point, and occasionally wider, contact. The eye is large, clearly apparent, and situated in the anterior half of the ocular. The snout is slightly prognathous, and the shallow lower jaw is inserted within it. Its anterior tip corresponds to the level of the nostril. The mental is medium-sized and flanked on each side by relatively small first infralabials; its posteriorly convex tip inserts into the anterior aspect of the shield-shaped postmental. The first infralabials are in broad contact with the anterolateral tips of the postmental; the large second infralabials maintain twice as long contact with its sides. The third infralabials are generally twice as long as wide, wider anteriorly, where they are in contact with the malars, than posteriorly, where they often extend caudally slightly be yond the angulus oris. The malars are large and subtriangular; their anteromedial tips are in point contact or excluded from contact with the postmental; in one specimen these tips were divided off by a suture. The post genial region is confused. There are two to four first postgenials, the lateralmost generally enlarged, anteriorly triangular, and en closing the posteriorly pointed tip of the postmental between them. Often there is a slightly smaller, azygous segment in medial contact with the posterior tip of the post mental. The three to six, generally five, irregularly shaped segments of the second post genial row include two wedge-shaped ones that appear to have been divided from the posteromedial edges of the malars. The row curves caudad and may be interrupted on the midline by the medial segment of the first postgenial row. The postmalar row forms a double curve and is composed of eight to 12, generally nine or 10, segments of irregular size. The confusing location of the angulus oris in some cases yields the impression that the postmalar row is absent. Dorsally the first body annulus sweeps anteriorly. It divides near the level of the angulus oris to produce a first intercalated dorsal half-annulus that includes the temporals and postoculars. The first body annu lus continues dorsad to include the (parietal) segments that surround the posterior aspects of the frontals. In a few specimens there is a secondary division into a partial or complete dorsal half-annulus, intercalated between first and second body (in some cases third and fourth) annuli and often fusing with them asymmetrically. The following annuli lose their anterior inclination by the suture posterior to the fourth, which lies in a plane normal to the long axis of the animal. The first eight annuli appear narrowed and separated by markedly wider folding lines that often give them and the one or two posterior ones a shortened and more convexly curved appear ance after preservation. Their midventral segments are markedly reduced, and consid erable irregularity is common in this region. The remaining annuli lie in planes more or less normal to the long axis of the trunk, though some anterior ones may show some degree of posteriorly concave curvature in dorsal view. There are 178 to 199 (sample means, 179.5 to 195.2) body annuli from the level of the angulus oris to that including the pore-bearing precloacals. Irregularities in the alignment of annuli are relatively common along the trunk. There are 13 to 18 dorsal and 16.5 to 22 modal numbers of ventral segments to a midbody annulus. The variation here is quite marked, and differences of one to three occur between adjacent annuli. Even large specimens lack diagonal folding lines. The cloacal region is characterized by two to five (almost invariably four) precloacal pores or pore scars. When fully expressed in mature males, the pore cores have a diameter less than one-sixth (rarely one-fourth) of the length of the pore-bearing segments. The lateral ones may be smaller than the medial ones, and some pore scars may lack cores. There are six to eight (generally six) more or less subequal segments in the short, segment shaped precloacal shield. Intersegmental sutures may run in parallel or radiate in a fan-shaped pattern, and the medial or later almost (of the series of six) may be the largest. The postcloacals number nine to 15 (gen erally 10 to 12), and their median pair is the largest. The cloacal region corresponds to three or four, generally three and rarely and asymmetrically two, lateral annuli. It is followed by six to eight caudal annuli, equiva lent in length to the body annuli, which run up to and include the autotomy annulus. Thereafter the remaining annuli of the total series of 18 to 23 caudals become significantly longer. The autotomy annulus is character ized by being narrower and marking a discontinuity in the caudal proportions. One quarter of the specimens had their tails broken at this point. The ventral surface of the tail is flattened; the section beyond the autotomy level may have a ventral crease. A similar dorsal folding line is shown from the level of the cloaca, up to and slightly beyond the autotomy annulus in slightly shrunken specimens, but is indicated only by inter segmental suture alignment. At its base the tail is wider than high; the part beyond the autotomy annulus is swollen in all dimensions and vertically rather than horizontally oval. The dorsal tip bears a trace of a vertical keel. The lateral sulci are clearly marked begin ning at the level of the twentieth to thirty fifth body annulus and continuing to that of the cloaca. They are approximately as wide as a bordering segment and filled with irregularly shaped segmental fragments. There is neither a dorsal nor a ventral sulcus, though the midventral intersegmental sutures are aligned. The middorsal segments are approximately one and one-half times as long as wide; the midventral ones are from one and one-quarter to two times as wide as long. Though considerable proportional variability exists, the medial segments are generally the widest, both dorsally and ventrally. (Gans 1966: 234)Detailed description (trachura): Gans 1966: 237.Detailed description (heterozonata): Gans 1966: 239.Comparisons: While Gans 1966 provided detailed descriptions of both darwini and trachura, he did not diagnose them. However, he did provide a direct comparison of main characters in Table 3 (Gans 1966: 234).
Amphisbaena dubia	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A medium sized form of Amphishacna without major fusions of head shields; with one or more pairs of large parietals; with a blunt-tipped cylindrical tail without autotomy constriction or autotomy ; and with two clear round precloacalpores in males and none [or two very faint indications only in females. Specimens have 213 to 231 body annuli ; 13 to 17 caudal annuli; 13 to 16 (generally 14 or 16) dorsal and 16 to 19 (generally 16 or 18) ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and two rows of postgenials and no postmalars. The color of preserved specimens is a light brown faintly countershaded. Segments bear a light circular spot. (Gans 1964)Detailed description: Gans 1964: 4
Amphisbaena fenestrata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size moderate (SVL to 242 mm); tail to 17 mm, cylindrical, tapering, rounded terminally; no caudal autotomy; middorsal groove present on posterior 2/3-3/4 of body; body annuli 236-251, caudal annuli 12-14; dorsal segments 13-14/midbody annulus, ventral segments 14-17/midbody annulus; rows of post-genials 2; 1 row of postmalar chin shields; 4 precloacal pores; rostral elongate posteriorly, completely separating nasals and extending between anteriormost ends of prefrontals; 1 temporal. Dorsum (as preserved) shades of brown, solid on head and tail; on body rectangular center of each segment much darker than margin, giving impression of dark spots; venter paler than dorsum, mostly white, due to dropping out of pigment on ventral segments; juveniles rather purplish (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 558).Detailed description: Gans & Alexander 1962: 131.
Amphisbaena frontalis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Preanal pores 4. Body annuli 252-272; tail annuli 23-29; autotomy level 6-7; segments to a midbody annulus 14-16/14-16. No fusions of head scales. Frontals the longest scales on top of the head, characteristically elongate, tapering behind. Parientals inconspicuous. Three upper labiais, the second by far the largest. Symphysial wedge-shaped, narrow. Post-symphysial irregular, octagonal to elliptic. (Vanzolini 1991).Description: A medium sized species (maximum body length, 10 specimens, 284 mm). Head convex, narrow, snout seen from the top rounded, from the side spatulate.Median sutures of the head in the following order of decreasing length: frontal, prefrontal, nasal. Frontals a little asymmetrical, with arcuate front edges converging forward, forming an obtuse angle; meeting the oculars below; with lateral edges, slightly bowed laterally, converging behind, truncate. Parietals very slightly enlarged. Three upper labials, the second very large, touching the postero-inferior corner of the prefrontal. Ocular irregularly trapezoid, followed by a very large squarish postocular, the largest scale on head or slightly smaller than the prefrontal; below this a large square postlabial, in contact with the first body annulus. Nostril near the lower angle of the nasal.Symphysial relatively narrow, with sides converging behind; posterior tip truncate. Post-symphysial varying from polygonal (octagonal or heptagonal, always with irregular sides and angles) to elliptic, with one or both ends pointed. Three lower labiais, the second very large, the third minute. Lateral genials short, broad, irregular, on one side reaching the oral rim behind the third lower labial. Scales behind the post-symphysial very variable, the most regular pattern comprising a row of six small genials and, between these and the post-symphysial, two other rows; the anterior one made of two scales that embrace the postsymphysial, their pointed tips extending forward, insinuated between the post-symphysial and the second labial; the next row with five scales pointed in front. All these elements subject to variation and disorganization.On the body, no dorsal or ventral sulci. Lateral sulci conspicuous from about annulus 44 back. Dorsal and ventral segments poorly aligned longitudinally; sulci between annuli deep and regular. Segments a little longer than wide.Anal flap with six scales, the lateral wider. Four preanal pores, placed against the hind edge of the segments, small, in some specimens ill-formed, practically cicatricial. Postanal rim prominent, forming a broad palisade with 15-16 narrow, irregular segments.Tail relatively long, in one specimen slightly clavate, well segmented to the tip, the segments still less well aligned than those on the body. (Vanzolini 1991).Color pattern: dorsally, head smudged with dark brown; body brown, center of segments a little darker, the contrast increasing laterally; segment edges lighter, forming with the sulci between annuli a checkerboard pattern. Lateral sulcus lighter that the dorsum, with groups of melanophores. Anteriorly (from the neck to approximately annulus 20) the segments below the sulcus dark, turning lighter ventrally, the belly throughout light yellow, immaculate; behind this level, one to five segments below the sulcus light brown with dark centers. Tail dorsally patterned as the body, ventrally more or less heavily smudged. (Vanzolini 1991).
Amphisbaena gonavensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION (gonavensis + hyporissor): Size moderate (SVL to 242 mm); tail to 19 mm, cylindrical, slightly tapering, rounded terminally; caudal autotomy uncommon, after fifth annulus; body annuli 199-225, caudal annuli 10-21; dorsal segments 16-18/midbody annulus, ventral segments 22-24/midbody annulus; rows of postgenials 1-2; 1 row postmalar chin shields; 4 precloacal pores; 6-7 precloacal scales, 11-14 postcloacal scales; nasal suture short; 2 temporals. Dorsum rusty brown, pale tan, to purplish, darker dorsally than ventrally (ventral ground color yellowish, throat gray with brown spots), and with some scattered, dark mottling (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 559).Other description: Gans & Alexander 1962: 111.
Amphisbaena gracilis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small to medium-sized Amphisbaena with a bluntly rounded, very wide first body annulus. Large and pentagonal parietals in broad contact along midline; two large supralabials; two large and one very small infralabials on each side, and no malars. There are 224 (holotype) to 248 body annuli; 21-22 (est.) caudal annuli with autotomy constriction falling on sixth to seventh postcloacal annulus. Tail medium long, rounded and of gradually reducing diameter. Four large suboval precloacal pores occur in all specimens.The color is a uniform dark brown (with violet overtones-Strauch) dorsally and ventrally, with pale sutures on head, and faintly prognathous snout, covered dorsally by enlarged shields up to nuchal region and including dorsalmost segments of cephalic and caudal surfaces (Gonzalez-Sponga & Gans 1971; may need a check for OCR errors).
Amphisbaena hastata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small slender elongate species (snoutto vent 149mm; head width 1.8-2.1 mm). Preanal pores 4. Body annuli 266-273. Tail annuli (one specimen) 40. Autotomy level on annuli 12 to 16, externally inapparent. No lateral or dorsal sulci; one midventral sulcus, weakly marked, on the posterior 3/4 of the trunk. Segments around midbody 35-37. Color uniform white, with dilute aggregations of melanophores on the back (Vanzolini 1991).Description: Small, slender,long tailed. Head not distinct from neck, elongate, acuminate, snout prominent, mouth inferior. Only one longitudinal sulcus, midventral, lightly marked, becoming evident between approximately the 30th and the 70th body annulus, and ending at the pore-bearing row of scales. No external indication of an autotomy annulus; in three specimens with broken tails the break between the 12th and the 13th tail annuli, one specimen with a healed broken tail with 16 tail annuli. Rostral little visible from above, extensively so from below. Of the median sutures on top of the head, that between the prefrontals largest, twice or more longer than the others. Anterior edge of frontals straight or slightly arcuate, converging in front into an obtuse angle; posterioredgeoffronta~s straight or arcuate, transverse. Behind the frontals one row of scales; those of the med!3n pair (parietals) widened, a little narrower than the frontals; laterally to these on each side one upper temporal, in full contact with the ocular; below, two scales behind the third upper labial. Nostril on the anterior half of the nasal scale. Ocular irregularly diamond-shaped, the eye sitting on the front halfofthe scale, touching or slightly transgressing the upper suture. Three upper labials, second very large, in point contact with the nasal (thus narrowly separating the first labial and the prefrontal), third in broad contact with the temporal. Symphysial elongate, wider in front, tapering and ending posteriorly in a narrow truncated tip, in contact with the anterior tip of the post-symphysial. Post-symphysial diamond- to pear-shaped, wider behind, the anterior tip meeting the symphysial. Three lower labials; the second largest, irregularly pentagonal; the third small, with four unequal sides. Lateral genials irregularly polygonal. Median genials regularily to irregularily arranged. In the former case, median genials in two rows, the anterior one with two elements, the posterior with three. Otherwise two or three irregular rows, with two or three scales each. One row of post-genials, with five scales on each side, increasing laterally. Sulci between successive body annuli well marked. Sutures between segments of the same annulus thin, straight, well defined, not very well aligned. The anterior body annuli strongly oblique back and downward, causing much shortened dorsal segments and relatively elongate ventral ones. Progressively the middorsal segments becoming larger, finally becoming lens- shaped; the median sutures are marked and aligned, almost forming a sulcus. The sides of the annuli bent in an S-shape, the ensemble of annuli 6 to 10 or I I forming chevrons with rounded forward vertices and spreading basal angles (hence "hastate"). Posterior to this the annuli becoming normally transverse. Preanal pores 4 in all specimens, large, rounded orelongate, functional (with plugs), sitting on the hind margin of moderately elongate segments. Preanal flap constitutec.l of 8 segments, in palisade, continuous on the sides with a post-anal series radially arranged. The ensemble occupying the length of four lateral annuIIi. No external evidence ofan autotomy annulus. Tail annuli regular, the segments longerthan those on the trunk, better aligned. Tip of tail smooth. Color pattern uniform: the animals off-white, with a very discreet condensation of melanophores on the back (Vanzolini 1991).
Amphisbaena heathi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small form of Amphishaena with a pointed, elongate, markedly flattened, very wide head, and somewhat prognathous snout, all circumscribed by smooth curves, and covered dorsally by very regular shields up to the nuchal region, with trapezoidal first parietals in point contact with each other; and with three supra- and three infralabials. The form has 183 to 187 body annuli; 7 to 8 caudal annuli up to the autotomy constriction (at which the tail is broken in both specimens); 12 dorsal and 18 to 20 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and four well expressed, large, round precloacal pores in the male, none in the female. Only the lateral sulci, and these but faintly, are apparent. Neither dorsal nor ventral segments are wider than long. The color of preserved specimens is an even brown dorsally, the pigment covering the entire segmental surface and fading out laterally. (Gans 1965: 615)Detailed description: Gans 1965: 615
Amphisbaena hogei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: This is a small form of Amphisbaena, without major fusion of the head shields, with a bluntly pointed head, with the prefrontals by far the largest segments on the dorsal and the mental on the ventral surface of the head, with only slight swelling of the rostral tip but with considerable bulging of the temporal muscles, and a tendency to two enlarged pairs of parietal segments as well as general enlargements of the segments of the postocular region. The form has 177 to 191 body annuli, 15 to 19 caudal annuli, a clearly marked autotomy constriction that falls on the fourth to sixth (in one case on the seventh) postcloacal annulus, 10 to 13 dorsal and 14 to 18 median numbers of ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and four large, round, precloacal pores in both males and females. The tail is cylindrical and roundly capped distally. Only the lateral sulci are apparent. Specimens are brown dorsally and faintly countershaded. The central rectangle of each segment is more darkly pigmented; the pigmented area shrinks below the lateral line and finally drops out by segments. (Gans 1966: 250)Detailed description in Gans 1966: 250.
Amphisbaena hyporissor	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A subspecies of Amphishaena gonavensis characterized by lack of fusions of head scales, a high number of caudal annuli, more than six precloacals ; an occasional caudal autotomy; and a mottled but faded coloration. Range: Presently known from the southeastern portion of the Barahona Peninsula of Hispaniola. (Thomas 1965)DESCRIPTION OF TYPE (Fig. 4): (Methods of counting and terminology follow Gans and Alexander, except for differences in terminology already noted). Head scales not fused; prefrontals as broad or slightly broader anteriorly than posteriorly. First two body annuli correspond to three dorsal half-annuli. First pair of parietals border anteromedially on frontals and are occluded from apical contact by an anterior extension of the left second parietal. Genial .81 times as broad as long. Three rows of postgenials present; first row with two enlarged scales (an abnormal, minute middle scale is present), apex of each scale projecting slightly beyond malar-second infralabial suture between genial and second infralabial; second row with three scales not including the two large triangular malars at each end; third row with four scales not including the two enlarged, terminal " postmalars. " Body annuli 213, four laterals on each side, and 20 caudal annuli. Sixteen dorsal segments and 24 ventral segments to an annulus counted at midbody. Four cloacal pores; 8 precloacal scales and 13 postcloacals, including 2 median, rectangular postcloacals. Snout-vent length 200 mm; tail 20 mm. Overall coloration tan, becoming darker and slightly mottled dorsally due to increasing amount of central dark pigmentation on more dorsal segments ; four ventralmost segment rows without dark pigment spots. (Thomas 1965)
Amphisbaena ignatiana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small, slender, elongate species (snout to vent 188 mm; head width 2.1-3.1 mm). Preanal pores 6. Body annuli 255-263; tail annuli 32-36. Autotomy level on tail annulus 6, externally inapparent. No dorsal or ventral sulci. Lateral sulci, weakly marked, on the posterior 3/4-4/5 of the trunk. Segments around midbody 16 above and 20-22 below the lateral sulci. Dorsal segments of the trunk dark brown with light sutures, the pattern extending to the lateral sulci orup to five segments below, the general outline crenelated (Vanzolini 1991).Description: Small, slender, relatively long tailed. Head narrower than the body, without a sharp separation: the neck becomes progressively thicker to the sixth or seventh body annulus, behind which the trunk is fairly cylindrical. The profile of the head with a strong convexity from the prefrontals to the tip of the snout; snout blunt but prominent. Lateral sulci weakly marked, becoming apparent between the 48th and the 67th body annuli. No external indication of an autotomy annulus, but in two specimens with broken tails the break occurring between the sixth and the seventh annulus. Rostral not or scarcely visible from above. Besides the three constant pairs of scales on top of the head (nasals, prefrontals, frontals), one pair of parietals, squarish to pentagonal. Median dorsal cephalic sutures sub-equal. The lateral sutures of the scales on the top and sides of the head forming a continuous, fairly smooth curve, from the parietals to the lip. Four upper labials; the first meeting the rostral in a definite suture; the second, the highest and largest, meeting above the nasal, the prefrontal and the ocular; the third meeting the ocular and the lower temporal; the fourth at the foot of the temporal row. Nostril on the antero-inferior quadrant of the nasal. Ocular roughly diamond-shaped; position of eye variable. One large upper temporal meeting the parietal, the frontal and the ocular, narrowly separated from the third supralabial (except on one side of one specimen, with point contact) by the lower temporal. Symphysial anvil-shaped, somewhat asymmetrical. Post-symphysial escutcheon-like, seven-sided, i.e., meeting the first upper labials at its anterior corners. Infralabials three, the second by far the largest, regular in shape or not. Lateral genials large, irregular. Median genials in two rows, respectively with two and with five or six scales. Two postgenial rows; the front one with eight scales, of which the outermost is much larger than the others. Sulci between successive body annuli well marked. Sutures between segments of the same annulus straight, well defined, better aligned on the ventral than on the dorsal aspect. Preanal pores 6 in all specimens, round, large, on the posterior half of the respective segments. Anal flap semicircular, with 8 scales; post-anal scales ca. 16, radially arranged, not in continuity with the anal flap. No external evidence of an autotomy annulus. Tail annuli regular, segments elongate and narrow, both dorsally and ventrally. Sutures evident on tail tip. Dorsum reticulate, the scales brown with light sutures. Belly creamy white, immaculate. The limit between the two areas varying from annulus to annulus, from the lateral sulcus to up to five segments below, the general outline being crenelated (Vanzolini 1991).
Amphisbaena innocens	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size large (SVL to 262 mm); tail to 18 mm, conical, rounded terminally; no caudal autotomy; body annuli 186-219, caudal annuli 10-15; dorsal segments 14-17/midbody annulus, ventral segments 18-22/midbody annulus; 3 rows o f postgenials; no postmalar chin shields; 4-6 (strongly modally 4) precloacal pores; nasal suture rather long but less than one-half length of prefrontal suture; 1 temporal. Dorsum (as preserved) shades of brown, at times with dark violet head and tail, grading to chocolate brown on body; color solid on head and tail, on body rectangular centers of each segment much darker than margins, giving the impression of dark spots; color darker dorsally than ventrally but no white segments (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 560).For a discussion of geographic variation see Gans & Alexander 1962: 101.
Amphisbaena leeseri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small form of Amphisbaena with the postrostral head shields paired and without major fusions of head shields, with the midventral segments of each an nulus as wide as long, and with a single pair of round precloacal pores (which is but faintly apparent in females) . Specimens have 216 to 240 body annuli, 14 to 16 caudal annuli, an autotomy constriction at the fifth or sixth postcloacal annulus, 13 to 15 (normally 14) dorsal and 14 to 18 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and 6 pre-cloacal segments. The color of each animal is dark brown dorsally, lighter ventrally, the color changing by a dropping out of pigmented segments. The posterior 15% of a segment is often light colored. The intersegmental raphes are light. (Gans 1964: 554)Detailed description: Gans 1964: 556.
Amphisbaena leucocephala	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A large-sized species of Amphisbaena, without major fusions of head shields; with a rounded snout on a relatively blunt head that continues into the trunk without nuchal constriction or posterior widening; and with large parietals equalling the frontals in size. The form has 233 to 240 body annuli; 26 to 27 caudal annuli, the last two poorly inscribed, and the terminal ones with the segments swollen. The sixth caudal annulus narrows sharply into an autotomy constriction. A midbody annulus has 18 to 20 dorsal and 21 to 22 ventral segments. The precloacal row bears 12 small round pores. Only the lateral sulci are strongly indicated. Specimens are brown dorsally and lighter ventrally, the brown color proceeding to the end of the sixth body annulus, so that the head and neck are light colored. The ventral countershading occurs more or less gradually along the sides, close to the lateral sulcus. There is some tendency for central pigment accentuation on dorsal segments and dropping out of pigment by segments. (Gans 1965).DESCRIPTION: The following description rests primarily on the type as the DZ specimen was not at hand when this was written. Figure 12 shows dorsal, lateral and ventral views of the head, Figure 13, dorsal and ventral views at midbody to indicate segment proportions, and Figure 14 a ventral view of cloaca and tail to characterize appearance of the pore row and the autotomy site. Figure 2 graphs meristic characters in comparison with those of A. pretrei, and Figure 3 shows body proportions. The meristic data are given in Table 1. This is a large-sized species of Amphisbaena of uniform dark brown dorsal and lighter ventral coloration. The dorsal darkening is achieved by a more or less uniform pigmentation of the entire segment, though the fading seems to be accentuated near the segment margins and along the intersegmental raphes and interannular sutures so that the segment centers appear darker. The head anterior to the fifth body annulus and the distal tip of the tail are completely unpigmented. The ventral countershading seems to occur by a dropping out of pigmentation at or near the lateral sulcus; it is not clear whether this occurs by segmental dropouts or by rapid fading. The autotomy annulus shows no special pigmentation. The head segmentation shows no major fusions. It is characterized by the enormous prefrontals and by an asymmetrical pair of parietals, averaging to a size equal to that of the frontals. The snout is relatively blunt and high, but slopes from the level of the parietal to that of the nasals. Temporal bulges are noticeable but not marked. The nuchal constriction is faint and the trunk diameter changes only gradually. The trunk is oval in cross section and shows some vertical compression. The rostral is somewhat larger than the first supralabial and almost invisible in dorsal view. Pairs of rectangular nasals, wide prefrontals more than twice their size, smaller pentagonal frontals, and first parietals equal to these follow in sequence, as may small second (and smaller third) parietals. The posterior edge of the frontals lies along the first portion of the first supralabial, somewhat anterior to the angulus oris. There are three supralabials, the first the smallest, the second the largest. The small and irregularly shaped postsupralabial is approximately one-third the size of the third supralabial. The supralabial sutures run between 450 and 750 anteriorly to the edge of the mouth, except for the posterior edge of the third which curves broadly caudad. The ocular is diamond-shaped, the eye relatively large. The mental roughly corresponds to the rostral in extent along the labial edge. It is somewhat larger than the first supralabial and its central process forms a broad, straight raphe with the much larger postmental. Laterally the postmental is in contact with the small first and very large second infralabials, and with the tips of the large malars, whose lateral extremities reach the elongate third infralabials. The posterior edge of the postmental is enclosed between a pair of dropshaped segments of the first postgenial row. The second postgenial row consists of five segments, the median and lateral ones being wedge-shaped and inserting some slight distance between the segments of the first row. The posterior tips of the elongate third infralabials enclose the ventral part of the first body annulus; nine segments, the lateralmost the widest, lie in the position of postmalars. Dorsally this annulus comprises the postsupralabials, and a very large temporal and a large postocular that contact the lateral edges of the frontals and (asymmetrically) the parietals. The second body annulus splits dorsally to form a dorsal intercalated half-annulus, all of the segments of this area being enlarged, irregular, and variously polygonal. There are 233 to 240 body annuli from the back of the third supralabials up to and including the pore-bearing precloacals. The ventral portions of the second through seventh annuli show some complexing and are composed of rounded rather than rectangular segments. The third through ninth annuli are narrower on their lateral and dorsal aspects than are the following ones and the interannular raphes appear capable of greater bending in that they are wide and filled with tiny fragments. The annular pattern is regular along the trunk and the only modification occurs in the cloacal region. There are 18 to 20 dorsal and 21 to '22 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, with considerable irregularity even between adjacent segments. There is a row of 12 small, but clearly marked, round precloacal pores in the male holotype and in the unsexed DZ specimen. Eight to ten segments form the shallow, segment-shaped precloacal shield, and 14 to 18 small postcloacals fringe the posterior edge. There are four lateral and six caudal annuli up to and including the markedly narrowed autotomy annulus. Caudal annuli number 26 to 27, the last three indicated only by very shallow raphes and represented as inscribed markings on the bluntly ridged caudal tip. Most of the dorsal and lateral segments on the tip appear faintly convex. The tail is bluntly oval at its base, swells laterally beyond the autotomy constriction, and then shows some faint lateral compression toward the distal tip. The lateral sulci are clearly marked after the 45th body annulus; at midbody they are about as wide as a fringing segment and filled with several kinds o'f irregular segments. Dorsal and ventral sulci are poorly indicated by alignment of intersegmental raphes. The middorsal segments are approximately 1.5 times as long as wide, the midventral segments about 1.4 times as wide as long, with some segment variability along the trunk (Gans 1965).
Amphisbaena lumbricalis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Very slender. Preanal pores cicatricial, usually 4, rarely 2, 5 or 6. Body annuli 225-247, tail annuli 20-26. Autotomy level not apparent in the intact tail, breaks on annuli 6-10. Segments to a midbody annulus 12-16/16-20. No major fusions of head scales. Prefrontals the largest scales on top of the head. Parietals veiy variable, irregular. Three upper and three lower labials, in both cases the second by far the largest. (Vanzolini 1996)DESCRIPTION: (Figures 1-3) A small form, maximum rostro-anal length (72 specimens) 156 mm. Head slightly arcuate in profile, snout rounded in dorsal view. Tail relatively short, cylindrical proximally, becoming progressively a little thinner on the distal two thirds; terminal cap slightly acuminate, little incised. Autotomy level not noticeable on the intact tail, broken tails (19 specimens) with 5-9 annuli remaining. Median dorsal sutures of the head in the following order of decreasing length: prefrontal, frontal, nasal. Prefrontals very large. Frontals forming together a rough diamond, with the front edges tending to a bow-like curve. Parietal series varying from a proper transverse row, with two larger polygonal scales on the center, to an irregular series, with diverse divisions and fusions, the latter occasionally extensive. Nasal scale large, the nostril near the front edge, a little below the middle. Three upper labials, the second by far the largest, the third high, narrowly meeting or missing the postocular. Ocular diamond-shaped; the eye, sitting on the front half, varies from invisible to a very definite black spot. Postocular large, polygonal, meeting above the frontal and the parietal series. Below the postocular a short vertical row of two scales, the lower one in a post-labial position, corresponding to the post-genial row ventrally. Symphysial moderate, a little wider in front. Three lower labials, the second by far the largest. Postsymphysial large, seven- or eight-sided. Lateral geniais (nomenclature as in Vanzolini, 1991) moderate. Anterior medial genials two, fairly regular, embracing from behind the postsymphysial. Second row of medial genials with three irregular elements. Postgenials four or five on each side, with diverse types of fusions. On the body no ventral or dorsal sulci; lateral sulci always present, though varying in degree of expression. Pores little marked, not definite and rounded, but scar-like, hard to see. Of 72 specimens, 67 with 4 pores, 1 with 2, 2 with 5 and 2 with 6. Preanal flap semicircular, with 8 scales. Dorsal parts reddish brown, head a little lighter. Edges of segments very slightly lighter than the center, without, however, taking a reticulate appearance. Below the lateral sulci the borders of the segments become progressively lighter, resulting in 5-6 rows of light segments with a dark center. Ventral parts of the body immaculate, waxy yellow to light cream. Underside of tail with a variable area of light segments with dark spots on the Middle (Vanzolini 1996)
Amphisbaena manni	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size small (SVL to 212 mm); tail to 22 mm, cylindrical, not especially tapering, rounded terminally; caudal autotomy between 5-7 caudal annuli; rostral and nasal fused; body annuli 209-243, caudal annuli 17-22; dorsal segments 12-16/midbody annulus, ventral segments 14-20/midbody annulus; rows of postgenials 2; no (or only very occasionally 1) row of postmalar chin shields; 4-9 precloacal pores; nasal suture short; 1 temporal. Dorsum (as preserved) uniform brown, only slightly darker on dorsum, head, and tail; darker centers of segments not obvious macroscopically (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 561).Detailed description: Gans & Alexander 1962: 113.
Amphisbaena medemi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small to medium-sized form of Amphisbaena with the nasals totally separated or reduced to medial point contact by the ascending rostral which generally contacts the frontals. Specimens often have azygous fusion of postocular and parietal head scales; three equally sized supralabials; one medium, one large, and one small infralabial on each side; two postgenial and no postmalar rows of chin shields. There are 230-235 body annuli; 17-18 caudal annuli with the autotomy constriction falling on the fifth to seventh postcloacal annulus; 16 dorsal and 18 ventral segments per midbody annulus; and four large circular precloacal pores in both sexes. The specimens are brown dorsally, fading to a lighter color ventrally. The color is densest in the rectangular centers of each segment, with the dark area decreasing along the sides and dropping out by segments in the neck and caudal regions. Many specimens show a light nuchal band (Gans & Mathers 1967).DESCRIPTION: Figures 2 through 7 show aspects of segmentation, pigmentation and body proportions. Figure 8 presents a scatter diagram of tail lengths versus snout-vent lengths. The raw data for the type series are given in Table 1. This is a small to medium-sized species of Amphisbaena, showing a brownish dorsal and a lighter ventral coloration. The tip of the snout and the nuchal region tend to be lightened, while the dorsal, lateral, and posterior surfaces of the tail are densely pigmented. The lateral limits of pigmentation extend onto the ventral surface of the tail so that only the medial two to four rows of segments are lightened. The intersegmental and interannular sutures are always lighter than the scale centers. Rostral, nasals, and superlabials as well as the chin shields tend to be unpigmented. Two or three annuli between the second and seventh may be faded or may lack pigmentation producing a light band across the nuchal region. The dorsal surface is more or less uniformly pigmented with only slight emphasis of the segmental centers. The two middorsal rows of segments are significantly darkened. One or two rows below the lateral sulcus the pigmentation becomes restricted to the segmental centers and these may become very small and faint by the fifth or sixth ventral row from each side. The three or four annuli anterior to the cloaca and the midventral segments of the caudal annuli show checkerboarding with the pigmentation appearing to drop sharply and often asymmetrically on individual segments. The head segmentation is characterized by a caudad projection of the dorsal tip of the rostral which partially or totally separates the nasals from medial contact and in some specimens inserts briefly between the pref rentals, and by the generally azygous fusion of parietal and postocular head scales; yet lacks other major fusions. The head is dorsoventrally compressed; the slightly elongated snout is dorsally arched but is of a horizontally oval cross-section. The rostral tip extends beyond the lower jaw and the temporal bulges noticeably posterior to the eye. There is some indication of nuchal constriction and slight reduction of the diameter of the nuchal region. The trunk is approximately the same diameter along its length and is compressed dorso-ventrally representing at midbody a horizontally oval cross-section. The rostral is visible from above, slightly larger than the first supralabial, and of the same area as the nasals. Pairs of separated nasals, large prefrontals, medium-sized frontals, and smaller, quadrangular to pentagonal parietals form a sequence along the dorsal surface of the head. The posterior tips of the frontals insert along the anterior suture between the parietals. Only four specimens have discrete parietals, in six that of the right side is fused to the enlarged postocular, in one fusion is on the left side and two show both sides fused. The diamond-shaped oculars are in anterior contact with the third supralabials and the large postocular. Each of three subequal supralabials is slightly larger than the ocular. The postsupralabial (just posterior to the angulus oris) abuts dorsally on the very large first temporal (which may be in point contact with the ocular). The postsupralabials, temporals, postoculars, and frontals apparently comprise the dorsal segments of the first body annulus. The four middorsal segments of the second body annulus are irregularly enlarged and lie posterior to the parietals, which thus seem to represent a medially intercalated pair of segments. The eye is clearly apparent. The mental is slightly narrower than the rostral, its area equivalent to that of the first infralabials which are followed by large sec ond infralabials and smaller rectangular third infralabials. The ovate, posteriorly triangular postmental is in straight contact with the mental, in broad contact with the first and second infralabials, flanked by the elongate elements of the first, and in narrow contact with the central element of the second postgenial row. The malars are roughly as wide as long, in medial contact with the third infralabials and broadly contact the second infralabials. The malars flank the two rows of postgenials, the interrupted first containing two and the second containing three to five segments. The second row of postgenials tends to be irregular and its segments may fuse with those of the first body annulus. There is no postmalar row, nor are the immediate postmalar segments enlarged by fusion. Dorsally the first body annulus includes one to two small segments posterior to the third supralabial, the temporal, the postocular, and the frontals. The dorsal segments of the nuchal region are enlarged and the corresponding ventral segments reduced. The dorsal segments along the trunk consistently decrease slightly in size from the nuchal region towards the cloacal zone and onto the tail. There are 230-235 body annuli from the back of the third infralabial up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal. Irregularity of the segmentation or dorsal half-annuli are rare. A midbody annulus contains 14 to 16 (generally 16) dorsal and 16 to 18 (generally 18) ventral segments. The cloacal region is characterized by four large, circular precloacal pores, six to eight precloacal segments, 12 to 17 postcloacal segments and three to five lateral rows. There are 17 to 18 caudal annuli up to the smooth caudal cap, with the autotomy annulus falling on the fifth to seventh postcloacal annulus. No specimens show autotomized tails or healed scars. Segments bearing rectangularly pigmented centers extend further ventrally on the autotomy annulus than on other caudal annuli. The tail is horizontally oval in section at its base, then reaches a vertically oval section, with an indented ventral surface in the terminal third. For the last three annuli it shows a sharp bilateral flattening so that it terminates in a blunt vertical keel. The lateral sulci begin after approximately the 45th body annulus and continue up to the level of the cloaca. These sulci are poorly defined and narrower than one bordering segment. There is no obvious dorsal sulcus. Lateral and ventral sulcal regions are characterized by slight indentations of the trunk.  The middorsal segments of the midbody annulus are approximately two times as long as wide. The ventral segments are approximately IVa times as wide as long (Gans & Mathers 1967).
Amphisbaena mertensii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Gans 1966: 542MZUFV 1449 measures 400 mm SVL and presents 242 body annuli, six caudal annuli (autotomized), 20 dorsal and 22 ventral midbody segments, three supralabials, three infralabials (Fig. 1), characteristics typical of Amphisbaena mertensii (Gans 1966). However, the number of precloacal pores (four) is outside the known range for this species, previously reported as five to eight, usually six (Gans 1966, Silveira et al. 2012). This is a rare condition that is noteworthy since the number of precloacal pores is a taxonomic character for amphisbaenians (Gans and Alexander 1962, Vanzolini 2002, Assis et al. 2022).
Amphisbaena miringoera	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small form (rostro-anal length 145 mm); 2 preanal pores; 250- 262 body annuli; median sutures between nasals, prefrentals, frontals and parietals subequal, or the latter slightly longer than the others (Vanzolini 1971).DESCRIPTION: Head elongate, with subparallel sides. Dorsal median head sutures subequal, or interparietal a little larger than the others (in one specimen the parietals are broken behind). Occipitals polygonal, relatively large. One large postocular fitting in the angle between the frontal and the parietal. Supralabials 4, second and third highest. Symphysial moderate. Infralabials 4, second largest, third and fourth low. Post-symphysial moderate, followed by 2 scales with transverse posterior margins. Body annuli 250-262, subequal. Dorsal and lateral sulci distinct, ventral sulcus not apparent. Segments to a midbody annulus 12/12-15. Midventral segments 1,5 to 2 times as broad as long. Preanal pores 2, small but distinct, rounded, not cicatricial. Tail with 22-24 annuli; sutures between annuli very well marked, deep; segments distinct to the tip. Dorsum isabeline brown, venter lighter. On the posterior third of the back the longitudinal sutures between segments tend to appear as fine white lines, and the posterior margin of the segments to show a dark bar. Measurements and meristic data in Table 1. The measurements of body length in Table 1 are not very reliable, as the specimens are stiffly fixed in awkward positions. Number 13757 is broken in two pieces (Vanzolini 1971).
Amphisbaena mitchelli	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A medium-sized form of Amphisbaena with two oval pre-cloacal pores; with the first parietals twice as wide and much larger than the frontals; and with three supralabials and three infralabials. The form has 211 to 220 body annuli; seven caudal annuli up to the autotomy constriction (at which the tail is autotomized in one specimen); 28 to 29 caudal annuli from the cloaca to the caudal tip which is faintly compressed lateraly; 12 to 14 dorsal and 14 to 16 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and two precloacal pores. The color of preserved specimens is a uniform darkish brown, darker on the dorsal than on the ventral surface and without any particular variegation or differentiation of the head or tail (Gans 1963: 3).
Amphisbaena munoai	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena munoai distinguishes from other species of Amphisbaena by the following combination of characters: (1) rounded head; (2) smooth segments on the tip of the tail; (3) four precloacal pores; (4) 202-218 body annuli; (5) row of postmalar shields present; (6) 18-25 caudal annuli; (7) caudal autotomy visible between 5 and 9 tail annuli; (8) 10-14 segments on the midbody annulus (from Perez & Borges-Martins 2019: 135).Comparison: Amphisbaena munoai is distinguished from A. albocingulata by presenting the post-malar row (vs. post-malar row absent). Differs from A. hogei by presenting 202-218 body annuli (vs. 177-191 body annuli). It differs from A. heterozonata by presenting 18-23 caudal annuli (vs. 13-17 caudal annuli). It differs from A. nigricauda by presenting a uniform coloration in the tip of the tail (vs. a darker coloration in the tip of the tail). It differs from A. trachura by presenting smooth scales in the tip of the tail (vs. tuberculate scales). It differs from A. darwinii by presenting a slender body and small SVL in adults, 102-151 mm (vs. sturdy body with long SVL in adults, 150-304 mm). Differs from A. prunicolor by presenting a uniform coloration pattern (vs. checkered coloration pattern). Differs from A. tiaraju sp. nov. by presenting a smaller distance between ocular shields, varying between vs. 28.7-37.5, x = 32.7 ± 0,9 of head length (HL) (vs. 35.3-42.7%,x = 39.5 ± 2,3) and 6.4% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance. It differs from A. arenicola sp nov. by presenting 3/3 supralabial shields (vs. 3/3 or 4/4 supralabial shields) and a larger nasal suture varying between 14.1 and 20.8, x = 17.6 ± 1.5 (vs. 12.5-17.2, x = 14.7 ± 1.5). Differs from A. nana sp. nov. by presenting a large frontal shield, with larger size than parietal shield, varying between 25.9 and 35.8; x = 27.7 ± 1.0 of HL (vs. 18.7-28.7% x = 23.9 ± 2.6; with similar size than parietal shield) (from Perez & Borges-Martins 2019: 135).See also diagnosis and detailed description in Gans 1966: 243.
Amphisbaena myersi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small amphisbaenid with a relatively long tail. Number of body annuli 221 (+1+1/2), tail annuli 27 +1, scales around midbody 16 + 16; three supralabials; three infralabials; supraocular small; preanal pores four, a distinct autotomy constriction ate the eighth caudal annulus. Head above and below creamish; dorsal surface of tail and back brown; ventral parts creamish; at middle of tail an irregular creamish crossband (Hoogmoed 1989).DESCRIPTION: Head as wide as the body, not depressed; posterior part with a slight, but distinct. Median dorsal sulcus. Snout rounded, blunt, swollen, strongly projecting over the mouth. Rostral small, pentagonal, wider than deep, not visible from above. Three supralabials, the anterior one trapezoid; the second one irregularly pentagonal, subequal to the first; the posterior one much smaller than the preceding two, rectangular, in broad contact with the ocular. Ocular small, trapezoid, in contact with second and third supralabials, first postocular and preocular; narrowly separated from frontal and temporal. Two large postoculars behind each other, the second one not in contact with the ocular; first quadrangular to irregularly pentagonal, larger than ocular; second irregularly pentagonal, on the left hand side subequal to the ocular, on the right hand side distinctly larger than the first supraocular. This difference in size is caused by irregularities in scale formation in the parietal region, as shown by left parietal that has incomplete sutures whereas on the right hand side it looks like the lateral part of the parietal has merged with the second supraocular, thus causing a large shield to arise. A single, pentagonal or hexagonal temporal, subequal to the ocular. Below temporal a small, quadrangular postsupralabial. A pair of large, quadrangular nasals in broad contact. A pair of smaller rectangular prefrontals, wider than long. A pair of nearly semicircular frontals, smaller than the prefrontals. Frontal suture longer than nasal suture, which in turn is longer than the prefrontal suture. A pair of pentagonal (left) or quadrangular (right) parietals, as large as, or smaller than the frontal. Some fusion seems to occur here.Mental large, more or less rectangular, with rounded hind margin and anteriorly diverging sides, much longer than wide. Three infralabials, the first more or less trapezoid; the second much larger, pentagonal; the third small, quadrangular. Postmental large, pentagonal, about as long as wide, distinctly separated from the large malars; followed by a first row of two elongate, trapezoid postgenials and a second row of four (central two largest) postgenials. A row of postmalars of which the outermost one on each side is much larger than the central five. Throat with transverse rows of quadrangular scales which are smaller than the ventrals.Scales on nape and side of neck similar to the dorsals, but more quadrangular and with rounded corners.Dorsals small, rectangular with right angles, longer than wide; 16 in an annulus at midbody level. Median ventrals larger than the dorsals, quadrangular to rectangular (wider than long); towards the sides ventrals smaller, as large as the dorsals, longer than wide; 16 in an annulus at midbody level. Total number of scales around midbody 32. A lateral sulcus separating the dorsals and the ventrals. Scales bordering on the sulcus have rounded lateral margins, the space between dorsal and ventral part of an annulus is filled by two small, oval scales. No dorsal or ventral sulcus.After the eighth dorsal annulus there is an intercalated incomplete annulus showing a gap of three scales on the belly; three annuli before the pore-bearing annulus there is an intercalated dorsal (half) annulus; 221 complete, one incomplete and one half annuli from the back of the postsupralabial to and including the preanal pore-bearing annulus; four lateral annuli in the cloacal region.Preanal pores four, transversely oval; posterior part of pore-bearing scales, which are longer than wide, divided into smaller scales; seven preanal segments; postanal segments not distinct.Caudal annuli (counting from the first complete postanal annulus) 27 and a divided endplate. The eighth caudal annulus consists of scales dis- tinctly smaller than those of the preceeding and following annuli, marking a slight autotomy constriction. Tip of tail bluntly rounded, slightly compressed in a vertical plane. (Hoogmoed 1989).Colour in life: unknown. (Hoogmoed 1989).Colour in preservative: the dorsal and ventral aspects of the head, the neck, the belly and the ventral surface of the tail are creamish, immaculate. Starting with the fifth body annulus, the dorsal scales show a dark pigmentation, increasing in intensity and area occupied posteriorly. Thus, the anterior part of the back is light brown, the posterior part of the back, and the dorsal surface of most of the tail are dark brown. All dorsal scales and the two outermost ventral scales on each side in an annulus are brown. From caudal annulus 7 to 17 there is a wide, transverse, creamish band on the dorsal part of the tail. The creamish area being invaded by some brown scales, whereas in adjacent brown annuli some white scales are present. This light band is not caused by damage to the skin, but is due to the absence of pigmentation in the scales concerned. (Hoogmoed 1989).Size: A small species with a slender, cylindrical body and a moderately long (about 1/8 of snout-vent length), cylindrical tail with bluntly rounded tip. Snout-vent length 188 mm, tail length 25 mm (Hoogmoed 1989).
Amphisbaena neglecta	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A form of Amphisbaena with the postrostral head shield paired, the midventral segments of each annulus broadened to twice their length and with a single pair of round precloacal pores. Specimens have 151 to 161 body annuli; 20 to 21 caudal annuli; an autotomy constriction at the 4th to 6th postcloacal annulus; 12 to 14 dorsal and 12 to 14 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and 4 to 6 precloacal segments. The color is dark brown dorsally fading slightly toward the ventral surface. On the sides each segment begins to be bordered by a lighter edge, which is most marked ventrally. The dark color drops out by segments along the chin, cloacal region, and the anterior portion of the ventral surface (Gans 1962).Notes on the types. The holotype shows the least fading of the color pattern. It is quite soft along the precloacal part of the body as are the paratypes. Several of the tails have been slit in someone's futile attempt at sexing and all of the lower jaws have been broken. Amphisbaenid, snake, and many lizard skulls may be extracted through a midventral incision, without damage to either skin or skull. The extraction of single elements or breaking of the jaws provides a minimum of information for a maximum of damage and should never be practiced on rare or unique specimens, if at all (Gans 1962).Description: Meristic characters are summarized in Table 1. Figure 4 shows views of the head, Figure 6 of the cloaca and tail, and Figure 8 photographs of the color pattern. The type series is a light brown dorsally, fading slightly toward the sides of the body. The segmental margins and intersegmental raphes of the back are insignificantly lighter so that the impression is one of continuous tone. The color is densest on the dorsal surfaces of the head and tail. The segmental margins are significantly lighter on the ventral surface. The tip, the supralabials, the chin region and the anterior quarter of the ventral surface are bleached, with the color coming in by segments from the sides and the rear. There seems to be some individual variation with ANSP 13019 completely dark after the first third, as in ANSP 13022; ANSP 13021 has no bleaching caudad of the first quarter, though ANSP 13020 has three distinct areas of bleaching prior to the cloaca. The cloacal region is entirely dark in ANSP 13021, has the left segment of the midventral pair bleached in ANSP 13019 and 13022, and all preand one postcloacal segment bleached in ANSP 13020. The Annapolis specimen has a light streak down the entire ventral surface with only occasional dark segments. It also differs by a light nuchal band made up of the sixth and some segments of the seventh body annuli. The head scalation is characterized by a lack of major fusions. The first two body annuli correspond to two dorsal half-annuli. The segments of the first are commonly referred to as temporal and postocular and abut middorsally on the frontals. The second body annulus culminates dorsally in the pair of enlarged parietals. The third annulus ascends in a plane normal to the long axis and is only differentiated by a wider than normal pair of middorsal segments. ANSP 13022 shows a posterior extension (by fusion) of the last labials beyond the angulus oris. ANSP 13021 has some asymmetric fusions in the parietal regions. The chin is characterized by a small symphysial, very large second infralabials, large first malars, a of anteriorly pair pointed postgenials, and a variable number of second postgenials filling the gaps along the posterior edge of the first row. There is no row, but the segments immediately posterior to the malars are fused. postmalar The second, third, fourth, fifth, and sometimes the sixth body annuli are slightly narcentral and two small lateral segments, exceptinANSP13021wherethereareonl rowed. Asymmetries are few and restricted to the midventral line and the level of the cloaca. The numbers of dorsal and ventral half-annuli are equal. The lateral sulci are clearly marked from four lengths behind the head to the cloaca. The dorsal and ventral sulci are indicated only by aligned raphes, with the ventral sulcus a common site of folding. The cloaca is preceded by four large four (possibly five). The autotomy constriction is expressed by a narrowed annulus of reduced diameter, posterior to which autotomy has taken place in AMNH 62155. The middorsal segments are slightly longer than wide, those along the midventral line two to three times as wide as long, with considerable change from front to rear (Gans 1962).
Amphisbaena nigricauda	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: This is a small species of Amphisbaena, without major fusions of head shields, with the prefrontal the largest segment on the dorsal, and the second infralabial by far the largest segment on the ventral, surface of the head, with a strongly prognathous snout on the small head, enlarged postocular and parietal segments, no post-malar row, and a dark, pigmented, caudal tip. The form has 222 to 226 body annuli, 19 to 24 caudal annuli, a clearly marked autotomy annulus that falls on the sixth to ninth postcloacal annuli, 10 dorsal and 16 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and four clearly marked, round pores in both sexes. The tail is cylindrical, with a conical distal tip. The coloration is very light brownish white, very slightly darker on the dorsal surface, but with the last six to eight caudal annuli much more heavily pigmented, both dorsally and ventrally. The darker pigment is produced by a speckling, rather than an even pigmentation of segments; the individual melanophores may be seen under the dissecting microscope. (Gans 1966: 252)Detailed description in Gans 1966: 252.
Amphisbaena occidentalis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: A small species of Amphisbaena with a dark purplish-brown dorsal, and light ventral coloration. The dorsal color is produced by pigmentation of the segments and drops out by segments along the sides (occasionally on the back) producing a characteristic mottled effect. The dorsal surfaces of head and tail are more densely and solidly pigmented than those of the body. The head is flattened and there is considerable dorsoventral compression of the pectoral region. The muscle masses lying over the parietal portion of the skull do not change the outline of the head in large specimens. The rostral is small, scarcely visible from above. Pairs of nasals, prefrontals and frontals form a suture along the head, with the posterior edge of the frontals lying somewhat anterior to the angle of the mouth (for nomenclature see Gans and Alexander, ms.). The occipitals are no larger than the dorsal segments. Four supralabials, the second largest. Three infralabials plus a small fourth scale that also forms the angle of the gape and projects dorsad around the posterior edge of the last supralabial. 261-79 body annuli from the back of last infralabial to and including the pore-bearing precloacals. The first four to six annuli of the neck region shorter than body annuli. Since the posterior edge of the frontals lies anterior to the fourth infralabial the annuli curve forward dorsally. This may be compensated for by an elongation of the dorsal segments of the 7th to 12th annuli (approximately). These annuli thus appear more or less V-shaped in dorsal view. Three to four dorsal half annuli (not included in the counts) are generally present in this region and there is a tendency toward considerable irregular interdigitation and complexity in the ventral portion of this (the pectoral) region. The six precloacal annuli also tend toward irregularities and asymmetries. Segments per midbody annulus generally 16 or 18 dorsals, 24 or 26 ventrals, 42 or 44 total. Ranges are 16 - 19 dorsals, 22 - 27 ventrals, 38 - 47 totals. Dorsal and ventral folding lines (grooves) are present but not differentiated. The lateral lines may be faintly indicated in approximately 50% of the specimens, on others they are only noticeable as aligned intersegmental sutures.There are four precloacal pores in all specimens, followed by six to nine precloacal segments, of which the central six are often large and of equal size. The post-cloacal segments are generally subject to splitting, yielding 11 to 16 very irregular radial segments. The pores of males are large and generally pigmented, those of females smaller, faintly indicated and nonpigmented. No other characters show significant sexual dimorphism (Gans 1961)
Amphisbaena pericensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A form of Amphisbaena without major fusions of head shields; with pairs of very large first and slightly reduced second parietals; with the head relatively blunt and not particularly set off from the neck; with a cylindrical blunt-tipped tail; with a faint autotomy constriction at the sixth to eighth caudal annulus where autotomy takes place. The form has 198 to 218 body annuli; generally, 18 or 19, occasionally 16 or 17 caudal annuli: 12 to 16 (generally 14) dorsal and 16 to 20 (generally 18) ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and 4 small round precloacal pores. The color of preserved specimens is a uniform dark brown, much darker dorsally than ventrally, lightened on the tip of tail and snout and produced by a dense pig- mentation of the segments (contrasted by lighter intersegmental sutures) (Gans 1963).
Amphisbaena plumbea	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Gans 1972: 14
Amphisbaena polygrammica	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	ORIGINAL DESCRIPTION: “Nichstverwandt A. plumbea Gray. Nasalsutur halb so lang, wie die zwischen den Frontalen und ein Drittel von der der Praefrontalen. Keine Occipitalia. 270 Körper- und 22 Schwanzringel; ein Körperringel enthält 44 Segmente, 26 unter und 18 über der Laterallinie. Acht Analsegmente, vier Praeanalporen. Drittes Supralabiale niedriger und länger als bei A. plumbea. Färbung weisslich; von den Segmenten der Oberseite die meisten braunviolett, nur die Ränder hell (wie z. B. bei Lepidosternum microcephalum); Schläfenschuppen grauviolett.Totallänge 245 mm. Schwanz 18 mm.” (Werner 1900).
Amphisbaena pretrei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A medium- to large-sized form of Amphisbaena, without major fusions of head shields, with a relatively wide, rounded snout, a head that continues into the trunk without constriction or widening, and with generally some modification of or anterior elongation of the ocular, or splitting off of a part of the lateral edge of the large prefrontal to form one or more small irregular segments. The form has 231 to, 255 body annuli; 22 to 26 caudal annuli, the last of which are poorly inscribed, and the terminal ones have the segments swollen. The fifth, sixth or seventh, generally the sixth, caudal annulus has sharply narrowed into an autotomy constriction at which some specimens have broken tails. Median numbers of segments to a midbody annulus are 20 to'27 for dorsals and 22 to 28 for ventrals. Five to nine, generally six or eight, precloacal pores lie in an uninterrupted series. Only the lateral sulci are strongly indicated. Specimens have a uniform brown dorsal surface and a clear ventral surface. The pigment covers the segments evenly, though there is an intra-annular pigment density gradient and some dorsal segments also bear a central light spot. The ventral countershading occurs more or less gradually along the sides. (Gans 1965)DESCRIPTION: Figure 4 shows dorsal, lateral and ventral views of the head' and Figure 5, ventral view of cloaca and tail. Figures 6 through 11 show various details of two specimens, one of which is the type of subocularis. Figure 2 summarizes geographic variation of meristic characters and Figure 3 compares body proportions with those of A. leucocephala. Meristic data are given in Table 1. This is a medium- to large-sized species of Amphisbaena of uniform dark brown dorsal and lighter ventral coloration. The dorsal darkening is achieved by pigmentation of the entire segment; in preserved specimens the pigment is slightly denser toward the anterior segmental margin. Certain dorsal segments show traces of a central, circular, light-colored spot. The ventral countershading seems to occur by a fading of pigmentation in some segments ventral to the lateral sulcus. The autotomy annulus shows no special pigmentation. The head segmentation shows no major fusions. The rectangular nasals are very wide and the prefrontals are the largest segments on the head. The parietal region is often confused; its often asymmetrical segments vary in size by one power above that normal to dorsal segments. The head is relatively blunt. The tip is wide in dorsal view, while the lateral view shows a significantly deep snout, and the head is almost as tall at the level of the nares as at the eye. Temporal bulges are noticeable, the nuchal constriction limited, and the maximum trunk diameter (attained near the 20th annulus) is but slightly greater than that of the head. The trunk is faintly oval in cross section. The rostral is subequal to the first supralabial, and almost invisible in dorsal view. Pairs of large rectangular nasals, somewhat larger prefrontals, and almost triangular frontals follow in sequence along the dorsal midline. In some specimens these are followed by a pair of large parietals, whose area is up to one-half that of the frontals. The posterior edge of the frontals lies midway along the level of the third supralabial, somewhat anterior to the angulus oris. There are three supralabials, the first equal in area to, but of much longer extent along the edge of the mouth than, the second. Both second and third are often split by a suture, parallel with the edge of the mouth, into supralabial and "subocular" (see table). The postsupralabial is approximately half the size of the divided portion of the third supralabial. The supralabial sutures run anteriorly at angles near 450 to the edge of the mouth. The ocular is extremely irregular, its outline varying from diamond-shaped to triangular. The variation primarily affects the anterior portion which encroaches on the area often occupied by the superior portion of the supralabials. The suture junction of the nasal-prefrontal, and of first and second supralabials may be occupied by a small segment or row of segments that may continue along the lateral prefrontal edge to join the anterior wing of the ocular (this condition coded as "Y" in Table 1, and shown in Figure 4). The mental corresponds with the rostral in extent along the edge of the mouth. Centrally it sends back a short, wide, posteriorly convex process that inserts into the anterior aspect of the large, shield-shaped postmental. The latter is also in contact with the small first and much larger second infralabials, and is surrounded posteriorly by a pair of large segments of the first postgenial row, occasionally separated by a small median segment, which excludes the large malars from postmental contact. The second postgenial row has three to six segments, two of which are often sliver-shaped wedges cutting off the medial edges of the malars and extending anteriorly beyond the limits of the other segments. In some specimens, the first postgenials are elongate, occupying the space of both rows, and two or three sliver-shaped segments (their number listed in parentheses in Table 1) wedge between their posterior extremities but do not contact the postmental. The long third infralabials often extend for half their length beyond the angulus oris to interrupt the first body annulus. A row of nine to thirteen segments, of the ventral portion of the first body annulus, lies between their medial edges in the position of a postmalar row. Dorsally the first body annulus swings forward to contact the lateral edges of the frontals back of the oculars. The temporal and postocular segments may be enlarged. The second body annulus includes the parietals and is generally split to form one or two extra dorsal intercalated half-annuli. There are 231 to 255 body annuli from the back of the first supralabial up to and including the pore-bearing precloacals. The ventral portions of the third through seventh annuli show some complexing, and are composed of rounded rather than rectangular segments. The fourth through ninth annuli are narrower on their lateral and dorsal aspects than are the following ones. The annular pattern is regular along the trunk and only shows an occasional modification in the cloacal region. There are 20 to 27 dorsal and 20 to 28 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, with but little alignment of intersegmental raphes. A row of five to nine, generally six or eight, small but clearly apparent, round precloacal pores appears to be present in the cloacal region of both sexes. Eight to 12 segments form the segment-shaped precloacal shield, with at least the central eight generally enlarged. The postcloacals number 13 to 19 tiny segments with only the central pair widened. There are three or, generally, four lateral rows, and five to six, rarely seven, caudal annuli up to and including the markedly narrowed autotomy annulus. Caudal annuli number 21 to 26 of which the last three (two to four) are separated only by very shallow raphes and represented as poorly inscribed markings on the bluntly ridged caudal tip. The tail is horizontally oval at its base, becomes more vertically oval posterior to the autotomy level, and the dorsal surface then curves ventrad so that the distal tip lies below the caudal midline. Some specimens have the last caudal annuli tilted from the vertical to face upward at a slight angle. The lateral sulci are clearly marked after the 40th body annulus; at midbody they are somewhat narrower than a fringing segment, and filled with irregular fragments. Dorsal and ventral sulci are only indicated as alignments of intersegmental raphes without other diversification. The middorsal segments vary from 1.2 to 1.5 times as long as wide. The midventral segments are about 1.2 times as wide as long, but proportions vary considerably along the trunk with the widest segments seemingly near midbody (Gans 1965).
Amphisbaena prunicolor	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description from COPE (1885): The genus [Aporarchus] has been defined in the key under the head of the species Anops kingii. It is simply Amphisbaena without preanal pores.The only specimen on which the species rests is of smaller size than those which represent the species enumerated in the above table, excepting the A. occidentalis, which is the smallest of the genus.Rostral plate scarcely visible from above; common suture of nasals short; nasofrontals each as long as broad; frontals each longer than broad; a pair of well distinguished square parietals. Labial, 3-3, the third reaching the ocular, so that there is no subocular. No superciliary or preorbital plate. Three plates in the row from canthus oris to frontal plate. Symphyseal broader than long, truncate posteriorly; postsymphyseal broad as long, subcircular, each half bounded by the postgeneial, and first and second labials to an extent represented by the order of mention. Last inferior labial twice as long as deep. Annuli 186 on the body and 23 on the tail. Preanal scales eight, the row preceded by a groove which is wider than the others. Tail obtuse, caudal annuli entirely smooth.Total length, M. .214; of head to canthus oris, .006; of tail, .029.Color, uniform plum-color above and below, excepting the lower jaw, chin and part of pectoral region and a postanal crescent, which are white. All the grooves of the inferior surface are white also, so that the animal has a latticed appearance below.Diagnosis: Amphisbaena prunicolor is characterized by the following characters: (1) rounded head; (2) tail tip rounded, with smooth segments; (3) four precloacal pores; (4) dark brown, purplish coloration, with uniformly pigmented segments on dorsum and belly with checkered pattern [from PEREZ & BORGES-MARTINS 2019].Comparison: Amphisbaena prunicolor is distinguished from all species of the A. darwinii complex, mainly by having a dorsal brown-purplish coloration and a ventral pale checkerboard pattern (vs. ventral uniformly colored). It also differs from A. trachura by presenting smooth segments the tail tip (vs. tuberculate segments on tail tip). Differs from A. nigricauda by presenting 181-215 body annuli (vs. 222-226 body annuli). It differs from A. hogei and A. heterozonata by presenting a higher number of caudal annuli, 18-27 (vs. 15-19 and 13-17, respectively). Differs from A. darwinii by its quadrangular parietal shields different from others body shields (vs. parietal region with variable shaped shields nondifferentiable from body shields). It differs from A. albocingulata by presenting a post-malar row (vs. post-malar row absent). Differs from A. munoai by presenting an elongated body, 141-238 mm (SVL) with similar number of body annuli, 181-215 (vs. smaller body, 102-151mm SVL, with similar number of body annuli 202-218 body annuli) and by 5% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance. It differs from A. arenicola sp. nov. by presenting a longer snout, varying between 44 and 73.5% (x = 55.5±7.4%) of head length (HL) (vs. 42.6-47.9%, (x = 45.9 ± 1.9% of HL) and 4.5% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance. Differs from Amphisbaena tyaraju sp nov. by presenting a lower distance between ocular shields, varying between 26.8% and 31.9% (x = 29.4 ± 3.6) of HL (vs. larger distance between ocular shields varying between 35.3% and 42.7%, x = 39.5 ± 2.3 of HL) and 5.1% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance. It differs from A. nana sp. nov. by its similar-sized pre-frontal and frontal shields (vs. reduced frontal shields, smaller than pre-frontal shields) and 4.9% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance [from PEREZ & BORGES-MARTINS 2019].See also diagnosis and detailed description in Gans 1966: 246.
Amphisbaena ridleyi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: Praemaxillary teeth 5 or 7, maxillaries 5-5, mandibulars 8-8. Snout obtusely pointed, slightly prominent. Tail thinner than the body, tapering. Rostral small, triangular; nasals forming a short suture a pair of very large præfrontals, followed by a pair of much smaller frontals; eye hardly distinguishable through the ocular ; a postocular, no subocular; three large upper labials, the second and third forming a suture with the ocular; lower border of second labial as long as or a little longer than that of the first, in contact with the second lower labial only mental quadrangular, followed by a large seven-sided chin-shield, which is much longer than broad broad; three lower labials, second very large. 180 to 196 annuli on the body and 18 to 20 on the tail the divisions of the annuli longer than broad, nearly equilateral on the middle of the belly, but nowhere broader than long ; 16 to 18 divisions above, and 20 to 24 below the lateral line. Anal shields SIX or eight. Prœanal pores four. Uniform brown or dark purplish brown above, pale brown inferiorly.” (Boulenger 1890).Variation and comparisons: 16 specimens were collected by Mr. Ridley. One has 180 annuli on the body, one 181, one 182, three 183, two 185, two 186, one 187, one 188, oue 189, one 190, one 195, and one 196; two have 18 annuli on the tail, eleven 19, and three 20. The “Porto-Bello" specimen has 189 annuli on the belly, and 19 on the tail. The number of annuli in five specimens of A. caeca (including the type) recorded by Strauch are respectively 212 + 15, 215 + 13, 227 +18, 230 + 16, and 247+15. Duméril and Bibron give 226-329+18. A specimen from Porto Rico, which I owe to the kindness of Prof. Lütken, has 228+19. Considering that the number 247 + 15 given by Strauch is taken from a specimen in the Paris Museum, received from the Copenhagen Museum as from the island of St. Thomas, where only A. fenestrata (Cope) = antillensis, R. & L., is known to occur, as Prof. Lütken kindly informs me, it is clear to me that the specimen with 247 annuli belongs to A. fenestrata. The number of annuli would range, in A. caeca from 212 to 229, and in the present species from 180 to 196. According to Strauch, the length of the labial border of the first labial shield in A. caeca is about one half the length of that of the second; on Peters's figure of the type specimen, as well as in the Porto Rico specimen before me, it is about two thirds in A. Ridleyi both are equal, or the former is a little longer. The snout is longer and somewhat more prominent, the tail thicker and more obtuse in A. caca than in A. Ridleyi. The ventral segments of the two median rows are broader than long in the former species, the coloration of which is also different. (Boulenger 1890)
Amphisbaena rozei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	The species is diagnosed mainly by the presence of four precloacal pores, a lateral sulcus, 205–209 body annuli, 20 caudal annuli, 15–16 dorsal and 14 ventral segments on a midbody annulus, and dorsal surface of tail covered by strong tubercles [Costa et al. 2018)
Amphisbaena sanctaeritae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena sanctaeritae is distinguished from all the other species of Amphisbaenidae by the following combination of characters: (1) head round, not depressed but laterally compressed; (2) prefrontal suture ≥ frontal suture > nasal suture; (3) four precloacal pores without a median hiatus; (4) lateral sulcus present; dorsal and ventral sulci absent; (5) 269–288 body annuli; (6) 2–3 lateral annuli; (7) 18–20 caudal annuli; (8) autotomy on 6th or 7th caudal annulus, not always perceptible; (9) tail with similar width along its length, slightly laterally compressed at distal part; (10) 10 dorsal and 14 ventral segments on midbody annulus; (11) three supralabials; (12) three infralabials; (13) one or two rows of genials; (14) post-malar row with 7–8 scales; (15) post-ocular present, but temporal scale absent, probably fused with third supralabial; (16) a pair of quadrangular or rectangular parietals, with similar size or little larger than adjacent dorsal segments; (17) dorsum with a cream ground color in preservative (probably pinkish in life), slightly to densely speckled with brown; (18) venter cream colored in preservative, probably pinkish in life.The presence of a round head (not shovel or keel-shaped), four precloacal pores and 269–288 body annuli readily distinguishes Amphisbaena sanctaeritae from all South American amphisbaenians except the following 11 species: A. arenaria Vanzolini 1991b, A. bedai Vanzolini 1991c, A. borelli Peracca, 1897, A. cuiabana Strüssman and Carvalho, 2001, A. frontalis Vanzolini 1991b, A. hastata Vanzolini 1991a, A. occidentalis Cope, 1875, A. plumbea Gray, 1872, A. polygrammica Werner, 1901, A. steindachneri Strauch, 1881, and A. townsendi Stejneger, 1912. Amphisbaena sanctaeritae differs from all 11 species by having 10 dorsal segments at a midbody annulus (≥ 12 in the other species). The number of ventral segments at a midbody annulus (14) further distinguishes it from A. bedai (16–18), A. borelli (16–20), A. hastata (16), A. occidentalis (24–28), A. plumbea (20–30), A. polygrammica (26), and A. townsendi (24–28). It also differs from A. arenaria, A. bedai, A. borelli, A. cuiabana, A. frontalis, and A. steindachneri by having a row of post-malar scales. Finally, A. sanctaeritae further differs from A. arenaria, A. bedai, and A. borelli by having precloacal pores in a continuous series (vs. with a median hiatus), from A. borelli and A. cuiabana by lacking a dorsal sulcus, and from A. borelli, A. cuiabana, and A. steindachneri by lacking a vertical keel at tail tip (Costa et al. 2019).
Amphisbaena schmidti	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size moderate (SVL to 240 mm); tail to 26 mm, cylindrical, slightly tapered, rounded terminally; caudal autotomy between 6-8 caudal annuli; head blunted, almost triangular, with deeply constricted neck; parietals enlarged; lateral-most postmalars enlarged; body annuli 192-207, caudal annuli 18-22; dorsal segments 13-16/midbody annulus, ventral segments 16-18/midbody annulus; rows o f postgenials 2; 1 row o f postmalar chin shields; 4-5 (strongly modally 4) precloacal pores; precloacal scales 5-8; postcloacal scales 8-14; nasal suture short, less than one-half prefrontal suture; 1 temporal. Dorsum purplish brown with darker head and tail; venter heavily pigmented but at times pinkish; adults with darkening of rectangular segmental centers; intersegmental raphes always lightened (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 561).For a more detailed description see Gans 1964: 3.
Amphisbaena silvestrii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A form of Amphisbaena with the postrostral head shields paired, the midventral segments of each annulus broadened to twice their length and with a single pair of round precloacal pores. Specimens have 179 to 181 body annuli; 20 to 21 caudal annuli; an autotomy constriction at the 4th and 6th postcloacal annulus; 10 to 12 dorsal and 10 to 12 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and 4 precloacal segments. Most of each animal is colored a dark brown set off by a lighter edge around each segment, the width of the edge becoming greater ventrally. The intersegmental raphes are light. The dark color drops out by segments along the chin, cloacal region, and the anterior portion of the ventral surface (Gans 1962).Notes on the type.-The specimen is well preserved with only slight fading of the color, but appears to have been cut into two pieces prior to preservation. The jagged edges of the skin fit, suggesting that nothing was lost. The agreement with the original description confirms the status of the specimen (Gans 1962).Description: Meristic characters are summarized in Table 1. Figure 3 shows views of the head, Figure 5 of the cloaca and tail, and Figure 7 photographs of the color pattern. The preserved specimens are a dark chocolate brown with the segmental margins, intersegmental raphes and anterior ventral segments completely bleached. The color is densest on the dorsal surfaces of the head and tail. The dorsal region is darker than the ventral because of the narrower light margins. The rostral tip, the chin , region, and the anterior quarter of the ventral surface are bleached. In the type the dark color also encroaches onto the ventral surface thereafter, while the Xingi6 specimen shows a more gradual invasion with occasional light colored segments or groups of segments along the midline. The Xingu specimen also has a light area around and including the cloaca. The head scalation is characterized by lack of major fusions. The first two body annuli correspond to two dorsal half-annuli. The segments of the first are commonly referred to as temporal and postocular and abut middorsally on the frontals. The second body annulus culminates dorsally in the pair of enlarged parietals. The third annulus ascends in a plane normal to the long axis and is only differentiated by a wider than normal pair of middorsal segments. The Xingu specimen shows the temporal and postlabial fused to the corresponding segments of the second body annulus, which is distinct both dorsally and ventrally to this point. The next three annuli are slightly narrowed, more so in the Cuiaba, than in the Xingui specimen. The chin is characterized by a small symphysial, very large second infralabials, large malars, two rows of postgenials, and no postmalars. The fourth, fifth, and sixth body annuli are slightly narrowed, more so in the Cuiaba than in the Xingi specimens. The body annuli are characterized by a complete lack of asymmetries so that the numbers of dorsal and ventral half-annuli are identical. The lateral sulci are clearly marked from four lengths behind the head to the cloaca. The dorsal and ventral sulci are indicated only by aligned raphes, with the ventral sulcus a common site of folding. The cloaca is preceded by four large segments. The tail is elongate, cylindrical, and terminally rounded. The autotomy constriction is expressed by a narrowed annulus of reduced diameter, posterior to which autotomy takes place. The middorsal segments are slightly longer than wide, those along the midventral line two to three times as wide as long, with considerable change from front to rear (Gans 1962).
Amphisbaena slateri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Among the Bolivian and Peruvian amphisbaenians (characters inside parenthesis) the round head distinguishes Amphisbaena slateri from A. kingii Bell, 1833, (keel-headed) and Leposternon microcephalum Wagler, 1824 (shovel-headed). The four precloacal pores distinguish it from A. silvestrii Boulenger, 1902 (two pores) and A. fuliginosa Linnaeus, 1758 (6–10 pores). The presence of 176–213 body annuli distinguishes A. slateri from A. borelli Peracca, 1897 (239–261), A. occidentalis Cope, 1876 (262–275), A. polygrammica Werner, 1900 (270), A. steindachneri Strauch, 1881 (255–266), and A. townsendi Stejneger, 1911 (261–279). By having 10–14 dorsal segments at midbody, A. slateri differs from A. alba (30–42), A. angustifrons Cope, 1861 (20–31), A. bolivica Mertens, 1929 (27–38), A. camura Cope, 1862 (28–42), A. cegei Montero, Sáfadez & Álvarez, 1997 (17–22), and A. vermicularis Wagler, 1824 (18–26). Amphisbaena slateri differs from A. heterozonata Burmeister, 1861 – sometimes considered a subspecies of A. darwinii Duméril & Bibron, 1839 (Montero 2016) – by the having 20–24 caudal annuli (vs. 13–18), enlarged parietals (vs. rarely enlarged), and a uniform body coloration (vs. dorsum brown, venter cream). Despite a small overlap in midbody dorsal/ventral segment counts between A. slateri (10–14/14–16) and A. heterozonata (14–24/15–28), specimens of the later most commonly have 16/18 segments. Finally, A. slateri differs from A. pericensis Noble, 1921 by lacking a compressed tail tip (vs. slightly laterally compressed), by having a postmental longer than the mental (vs. postmental faintly longer than mental) and having a uniform body coloration (vs. dorsum brown, venter cream). A summary of morphological characters useful to identify Peruvian and Bolivian amphisbaenids is present in Table 2.Expanding comparisons to all Neotropical amphisbaenians, we find an overlap of most morphological character states between A. slateri and A. albocingulata Boettger, 1885, A. darwinii Duméril & Bibron, 1839, A. hogei Vanzolini, 1950, A. manni Barbour, 1914, A. mensae Castro-Mello, 2000, A. munoai Klappenbach, 1960, A nigricauda Gans, 1966, A. prunicolor (Cope, 1885), A. schmidti Gans, 1964, and A. talisiae Vanzolini, 1995. The uniform color pattern of A. slateri distinguishes it from A. albocingulata, A. darwinii, A. hogei, A. mensae, A. munoai, A. nigricauda, A. schmidti, and A. talisiae (countershading pattern), and from A. prunicolor (venter with a checkerboard pattern). By presenting a modal number of 14 midbody ventral segments, Amphisbaena slateri differs from A. hogei, A. manni, A. munoai, A. nigricauda, A. prunicolor, and A. schmidti (16), A. albocingulata (18), and A. darwinii (20). While all known specimens of A. slateri have four precloacal pores, most specimens of A. manni have six pores – females of A. nigricauda and A. prunicolor lack pores, but this trait is unknown in A. slateri, since no specimen was sexed. Postmental is distinctly longer than wide in A. slateri, while it is almost long as wide in A. darwinii, A. mensae, A. munoai, A. nigricauda, A. prunicolor, and A. talisiae. Parietals are enlarged in A. slateri, but not in A. manni and are irregular in A. darwinii. Finally, while the tail tip is rounded in A. slateri, it is conical in A. manni and has a slight lateral constriction in A. darwinii, A. hogei, and A. nigricauda (from Costa et al. 2018).
Amphisbaena slevini	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small form of Amphisbaena without major fusion of head shields; with only two supralabials and two infralabials, but with two pairs of enlarged postlabials following thereafter on the side of the head; and with the postocular and parietal very much enlarged, extending posteriorly to just anterior to the head joint,each larger than the frontal, and the most noticeable feature of the head.The form has 204 to 211body annuli; five to six (in some specimens four) caudal annuli up to the autotomy constriction (at which the tail is autotomized in more than half of the specimens); 23 to 25 caudal annuli from the cloaca to the bluntly rounded caudal spine; 12 (in some specimens 10 to 14) dorsal and 12 (in some specimens 10 to 11) ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and four precloacal pores or pore scars. The color of preserved specimens is a uniform medium brown, with litle countershading and without any particular variegation or differentiation of the head or tail Gans 1963: 14).
Amphisbaena spurelli	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	ORIGINAL DESCRIPTION (based on 2 specimens): “Snout rounded, prominent. Rostral rather small, triangular, just visible from above ; nasals forming a suture; a pair of prefrontals, the largest head-shields, the suture between them once and a half to once and two-thirds as long as that between the nasals and slightly longer than that between the frontals, which are much smaller and a little longer than broad *; a pair of small occipitals ; eye distinguishable under the ocular, which is situated between the prefrontal and the second and third upper labials and followed by two superposed postoculars ; four upper labials, fourth small, second very large; symphysial trapezoid, the sides slightly concave, followed by a longer chinshield ; four lower labials, second largest. 213 or 214 annuli on the body, 21 to 23 on the tail; an annulus in the middle of the body contains 34 or 36 segments, 16 or 18 dorsal and 18 ventral, the dorsals at least twice as long as broad, the median ventrals once and a half to twice as broad as long ; the dorsal segments on the distal half of the tail tubercular or subconical. Lateral line very distinct. 6 anal segments. 4 preanal pores. Whitish, each dorsal segment with an oval or squarish purplish-brown spot. Length to vent 320 mm; tail 28; diameter of body 10.” (Boulenger 1915).Diagnosis: “Distinguished from A. darwini D. & B. by the broader ventral segments and the tubercular segments on the tail.” (Boulenger 1915).
Amphisbaena stejnegeri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A form ofAmphisbaena with the mental and postmental fused; with the nasals the largest segments on the head [and the frontals scarcely distinguished; with the oculars split to form triangular infraoculars equal in size to the oculars]; and three supralabials and two infralabials. The form has 247 [243] body annuli; nine caudal annuli up to the autotomy constriction (at which the tail is autotomized); 17 to 18 [19] dorsal and 16 [20] ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and six precloacal pores. The color of preserved specimens is yelowish,with an irregular dorsal scatering of individual dark segments [the frequency of dark segments is suficiently high on the midbody dorsal surface to yield the impression of a scatering of light segments on a dark background], thinning out anteriorly toward an immaculate head.The anterior half of some [most] infracaudal segments is strongly pigmented, while the infracaudal segments of the ninth postcloacal annulus are entirely pigmented (Gans 1963: 5)
Amphisbaena talisiae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena talisiae can be distinguished from its congeners by a series of morphological characters, including a round head, three supralabial and three infralabial scales, postmalar row absent, four precloacal pores without a median hiatus, 205–234 body annuli, 17–29 caudal annuli, 10–14 dorsal and 14–18 ventral segments in a midbody annulus (Costa et al. 2019).Amphisbaena talisiae, sp. n., from Serra da Pitomba (15° 49'S, 52° 10'W), a small, slender species, is characterized by having four preanal pores, 218 body annuli, caudal autotomy on the seventh annulus (tail broken and healed), 10/14 segments to a body annulus.Description: “Small (body length 105 mm), slender (head width 2.5 mm).Median sutures on the dorsal aspect of the head in the following order of increasing length: (nasals, frontals), parietals, prefrontals. Frontals together oval; parietals pentagonal, moderately elongate; occipitals little differentiated from the segments on their annulus. Nasal large, nostril below and before the center on the scale. Four upper labials, second and third large, the ocular fitting into their upper angle. Fourth upper labial small, squarish. On top of it a large polygonal scale and, on top of this, another large similar scale, in contact with the ocular, the frontal, the parietal, and, behind, with an annulus of scales anchored on the parietals. Symphysial medium-sized, with divergent sides but not quite anvil-shaped. Post-symphysial almost as broad as long, seven-sided. Three lower labials, the second by far the largest, the third small, rectangular. Anterior genials moderate, in ample contact with each other, embracing in front the posterior angle of the post-symphysial. Lateral genials large, in full contact with the third labials. Posterior genials six, the outermost largest.Body with well marked lateral sulci; no other sulci. Dorsal segments a little longer than broad, broadest ventral ones not quite 1.5 times as broad as long. Preanal pores four, hardly distinguishable. Preanal fold almost semicircular, with six scales.Color: Dorsally burnt medium brown, darkest on the top of the head, with lighter segment sutures; ventrally uniformly light waxy yellow, the transition gradual on the flanks.” (Vanzolini 1995)
Amphisbaena tragorrhectes	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small Amphisbaena (rostro-anal length about 110 mm); 4 preanal pores; 31 tail annuli; first supralabial very large; post-symphysial narrow and elongate; first and second infralabials fused. (Vanzolini 1971)DESCRIPTION: Internasal and interfrontal sutures the longest on the dorsal aspect of the head. Parietals polygonal, large but forming a short median suture. Postocular high and narrow. Supralabials 4, first and second very large. Symphysial small. Post-symphysial narrow, elongate, a little broader behind. Infralabials 3, the first enormous, representing 2 fused shields. Behind the post-symphysial two scales with transverse posterior margin; behind those a transverse row of regular scales, reaching laterally the hind half of the second infralabial. Body annuli 196. Dorsal sulcus not clearly marked, ventral not apparent, lateral well marked. Segments to a midbody annulus 12/12. Medio-ventral segments about twice as broad as long. Preanal pores 4, large. Preanal segments 6. Tail smooth, with 31 annuli, the segments at the tip obsolete. Dorsum dark brown, venter much lighter, the transition, rather sharp, 1-2 segments below the lateral sulcus. This specimen's vertebral column is broken at midbody; the skin is intact, but body length cannot be accurately measured. The name refers to the city of Oriximina, the type-locality, where we have had the help of an excellent group of collectors. It is an approximate Greek rendition of "espouca-bode" (goat burster), the nickname regionally given to natives of Oriximina because of the peculiar properties of the local cassava meal (Vanzolini 1971).
Amphisbaena vanzolinii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A form of Amphisbaena without major fusions of head shields; with the nasals the largest segments of the head and divided from the frontals by a peculiar V-shaped suture; without enlarged malars; with two supralabials and one and a halfinfralabials. The form has 225 to 228 body annuli; apparently more than 15 caudal annuli (the tail is broken in both types); no caudal autotomy constriction; 12 to 13 dorsal and 16 to 17 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and four round precloacal pores. The color of preserved specimens is a uniform dark brown dorsally, fading to a lighter ventral coloring. The tendency toward darkening of the rectangular segmental centers is only faintly apparent under the microscope (Gans 1963: 13).The belly of Surinam A. vanzolinii is white and the back light- to dark-brown, exactly the same as in A. hugoi. All meristic and other characters mentioned by Vanzolini (1990, 2002) for A. hugoi completely fall within the range of variation known for A. vanzolinii.
Amphisbaena vermicularis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A medium- to large-sized, elongate form of Amphisbaena having a fairly blunt snout; without fusion of head shields; with the prefrontals the largest segments by far; with minimal enlargement of parietals; with generally four supra- and three infralabials; and with a relatively long, cylindrical, bluntly terminating tail. The form has 211 to 254 body annuli; five to seven (generally six) caudal annuli up to the autotomy constriction (at which the tail is autotomized in 23.6 per cent of the specimens) ; 23 to 30 caudal annuli from the cloaca to the tip of the tail, which may be slightly compressed in a very few specimens; 18 to 26 dorsal and 18 to 25 ventral segments to a mid-body annulus; and four round precloacal pores in all specimens. The tail is characteristically elongate and cylindrical; the species has only lateral sulci. The color of preserved specimens is a uniform brownish dorsally, becoming lighter ventrally. The coloration occasionally gives the impression of being denser along the anterior edge of each annulus, with the fading-out along the side occurring diagonally from posterior to anterior edge of an annulus. The dorsal surface of the tail and of the head are darker, but the intersegmental sutures are lightened, thereby giving the neck a characteristic reticulated pattern (Gans & Amdur 1966: 71).GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION: The available samples are insufficient for more than a preliminary estimation of trends. Adequate representation is most clearly available for some localities in the states Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Gerais, and Goias, though even these states hardly show a complete sampling. The records for Para come from enough sources to suggest that A. vermicularis occurs in that state, though the specimens may not actually stem from the (rain forest?) sites from which they are recorded. The Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro records are probably spurious, but there is no reason to doubt the Bolivian one, so that the species may well extend close to the foothills of the Andes. Unfortunately there is a large, but disappointing (since probably composite) series labeled with such central Brazilian place names as Borba. Cuyaba. and Rio Branco. These Menna Museum specimens stem from the Xatterer collection, known to have become confused (Gans, 1955), and internal evidence suggests that this is indeed the case. The general pattern of geographical variation is highly complex, and shows only a few sharp boundaries and almost no concordance. While there are several instances of marked local differences for individual characters, as yet there is no reason for recognizing subspecies within this assemblage. Publication of the available data may permit future workers to test and refine the roughly sketched pattern.(1) Number of body annuli. Figure 2A presents a summary of the variation of number of body annuli. The highest values are found in the northeast where A. vermicularis overlaps A. pretrei (Gans, 1965) which also has high values. Somewhat lower values are found in Goiás and possibly in a narrow corridor extending into Bolivia. The two latter groupings are separated by an area of very low counts in inland Bahia. Equivalent low counts are found in southern Minas Gerais (Lagoa Santa), while southern Bahia, northern Minas Gerais specimens, as well as those from the northernmost parts of the species range, have intermediate values. (2) Number of caudal annuli. Figure 2 B presents a summary of the variation of this character. Again there is a tendency for high values in the northeast and in a belt inland to Bolivia. Yet the borders of the region are shifted significantly from those for high numbers of body annuli. There is no significant difference between the counts of the southern and the northern populations. The high values in the zone of sympatry with A. pretrei are of interest as these increase the difference between the two forms. (3) Number of segments to a mid-body annulus. This character shows great intraspecimen and intrasample variation, which masks any geographic variation. The reality of the trends in the present material will have to be checked on the basis of larger series. (4) Body size. Amphisbaena vermicularis is a much smaller species than A. pretrei. Histograms for several geographically defined populations (fig. 3) do not furnish grounds for assuming differences between them. The northern samples are obviously too small to permit comment. (5) Relative tail length. The tail of A. vermicularis is relatively longer than that of A. pretrei or A. leucocephala. Tendency to intermediacy occurs in specimens of A. vermicularis from outside of the region of sympatry. Specimens from Bahia and Minas Gerais have the longest, and those from Cara to Sergipe and Goiás to Bolivia relatively the shortest tails, though there is extensive scatter and broad overlap between samples (fig. 3). It is interesting to note that the sample from Bom Jesus de Lapa differs from the rest of the Bahia sample by having a significantly shorter tail, as do some of the Vienna Museum specimens from "Mato Grosso." These samples show no other correlated differences. (6) Color pattern. A number of specimens from localities in Pará, Goiás, Minas Gerais, and Bolivia show an accentuation of the pigment along the anterior edge of each segment (cf. fig. 6). Only in Santa Isabel is this pattern found in all specimens of a sample; its frequency is low in other cases. Such accentuation (as opposed to an evenly distributed dorsal pigmentation) is always restricted to the anterior segmental edge, rather than covering half the segment as in A. mertensi Strauch (Gans, manuscript). (7) Head segmentation. The parietals are generally small segments but slightly larger than the oculars, though they very occasionally exceed the frontals in size. Considerable variation exists within the species, indeed between the left and right sides of some specimens (fig. 5), but this does not seem geographically correlated or constant within single populations. The specimens with enlarged parietals are thus scattered over the entire range. Furthermore, the enlargement is extensive relative only to the condition found in most specimens of A. vermicularis; it almost never attains the proportions shown by specimens of A. mertensi. (8) Precloacal pores. All specimens except three out of a series of seven from Cana Brava, Goiás have four precloacal pores. The latter series has four specimens with four, two with five, and one with six pores. This suggests some similarity to the northern samples of A. mertensi (which have six or more pores).(Gans & Amdur 1966: 71ff).
Amphisbaena xera	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION: Size moderate (SVL to 245 mm); tail to 20 mm, tapered, not so cylindrical or rounded terminally as in other species; caudal autotomy between 5-7 caudal annuli; body annuli 225-234, caudal annuli 10-16; dorsal segments 12-16/midbody annulus, ventral segments 14-16/midbody annulus; rows of post-genials 2-3; no postmalar chin shields; 2-4 (strongly modally 4) precloacal pores; nasal suture long, one-third to one-half prefrontal suture; 1 temporal. Dorsum pale tan, more brown toward head and tail; venter pink (due to superficial vascularity); dark ventral pigmentation almost absent in ventralmost 4 rows; dropping out of pigmented ventral segments occurs but is not obvious because all ventral pigmentation fades; temporal region deep, reddish purple; snout and posterior one-half of edge of lower jaw buffy (Schwartz & Henderson 1991: 562).
Ancylocranium barkeri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. In some ways nearer to B. africana, but distinguished from its geographically nearest relative as follows:(1) A single pair of shields (parietals) on occiput behind rostral; 31 (20 + 11) segments in a midbody annulus; median ventrals in a single transversely dilated series; 222 annuli on body, 5 on tail, but posterior half of tail without annuli; range: Tanganyika Territory ---> barkeri(2) Two pairs of shields (postfrontals and parietals) on occiput behind rostral; 49-55 (27-32 + 21-24) segments in a midbody annulus; median ventrals in a double series; 186-199 annuli on body, 6-8 on tail extending to the tip; range: Somalia and British Somaliland ---> somalicum (Loveridge 1946: 74)Description. Rostral enormous, compressed, arched, with sharp cutting edge, nostril pierced in the rostral, slightly above and anterior to the groove separating rostral from first upper labial; neither nasal nor nasal suture; no prefrontal; no frontal; no postfrontals; a single pair of shields (parietals) on occiput behind rostral and immediately above a narrow, vertically-elongate ocular that is preceded by a slightly broader preocular and followed by a similarly vertically-elongate postocular; eye hidden; no temporals; upper labials 3, second largest and immediately below the preocular, the ocular resting in an angle between the second and third labials; two pairs of elongate sublinguals of which the anterior pair (postmentals) are the longer; the posterior pair in contact with the median pair of a row of 6 scales that separate a pair of large, wedge-shaped sublabials; lower labials 3, the second enormous, the third scarcely noticeable. Body annuli 222 between the 6 scales mentioned above and the 6 enlarged anals, 5 caudal annuli apart from the elongate dome-shaped terminal segment that occupies more than half the length of tail; 31 (20 + 11) segments in a midbody annulus, dorsal segments longer than broad; the median ventral segment resembling the ventral shield of a snake being broader than all the other 10 ventral segments together; anals; no preanal pores. (Loveridge 1946: 74)Color. In alcohol. Tip of snout horn colored, rest of head and body dirty white (? flesh-pink in life), tip of tail purplish brown. (Loveridge 1946: 74)Size. Total length of holotype male, 193 (185 + 8) mm. (Loveridge 1946: 74)
Ancylocranium ionidesi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. Differs from somalicum (Scortecci, 1930), and agrees with barker Loveridge (1946, p. 74, fig.) in having only a single pair of shields (parietals) immediately behind the rostral on the vertebral line. Differs from barkeri as follows:(1) 31 (20 + 11) segments in a midbody annulus; median ventrals in a single transversely dilated series; 222 annuli on body, 5 on tail (but this is almost certainly regenerated as its posterior half lacks annuli); only the type & from Mbemkuru River, Lindi, Tanganyika Territory, known . . . barkeri.(2) 34 (18 + 16) segments in a midbody annulus; median ventral scarcely broader than their fellows; 302-327 annuli on body, 19-23 on tail; only the type &, two adult 99 and a juvenile paratype from Kilwa District, on east coast north of Lindi, T.T., known . ionidesi. (Loveridge 1955: 177)Description. Rostral enormous, compressed, arched, with sharp cutting edge; nostril pierced in the rostral (left side) or in a nasal that anteriorly appears fused with the rostral (right side and in paratype); nasal sutures indicated on three sides; no prefrontals; no frontal; no postfrontals; a single pair of very small, widely separated shields on either side of rostral correspond to the parietals of barkeri, each being immediately above a narrow, vertically elongate ocular which is bordered anteriorly by the rostral, posteriorly by the first annulus; eye hidden; no temporals; upper labials two (the third labial of barkeri being reduced to a small scale at the commissure of the mouth), second larger and immediately below the ocular, whose anterior corner rests on the first labial; lower labials three, the first minute, the third enormous; mental tremendously elongate, ribbon-like (owing to fusion with both the anterior and posterior sublinguals of barkeri) bounded posteriorly by a row of four elongate gulars, which again are followed by a row of six similarly elongate scales flanked on either side by a relatively small shield. Body annuli 327 (I got the same number on the paratype at one counting, but owing to it being somewhat macerated at one point neither my colleague Benjamin Shreve nor I could get the same count twice; we feel that 327 + or is the more accurate way in which to state the paratype's annuli) between the rostral and the row corresponding to the posterior edge of anal opening; 34 (18 + 16) segments in a midbody annulus, the median ventral series not, or but scarcely, broader than their fellows; six anals (clearly so in paratype, obscured by extruded hemipenes in holotype); no preanal pores. (Loveridge 1955: 177)Color. In alcohol. White, uniform (? flesh-pink in life). (Loveridge 1955: 177)Size. Total length of holotype male, 215 (196 + 19) mm.; of larger paratype female, 217 (200 + 17) mm.; of juvenile paratype, 107 (97 + 10) mm. (Loveridge 1955: 177)
Ancylocranium somalicum	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Definition (genus). Snout compressed, raised into a keel, formed by the premaxilla, nasals, frontals, and part of the parietal plate. Superior aspect of keel raised far above level of parietal surface, its posterior aspect may have a horn-like posterior projection. Basipterygoid processes, partes posteriores choanarum and supratemporals absent. Quadrate variably dilated proximally. Stapes very large, with prominent extracolumella adjacent to lateral aspect of quadrate. Rostral shield enormous, heavily keratinized. Second infralabials markedly enlarged. forming the largest shields on the lower jaw (from Gans & Kochva 1966)Key to the genera of keel-headed amphisbaenids (from Gans & Kochva 1966):Head modified into a vertical keel by strong lateral compression of its anterior aspect; rostral keel covered with a more or less pronounced layer of keratin expressed as a single shield.1. Shield relatively narrow, paralleled posteriorly by one or two inclined series of vertically elongate segments anterior to the ocular; nostril pierced in discrete nasal segment; menIal and postmental relatively wide, of approximately equal area to first plus second infraJabials; no marked post-cephalic fold (cr. Fig. 3, 4 in Gans and Rhodes, 1964) (South America) --> Anops BellShield wide; nostril in discrete segment or in anterior shield; mental and postmental(s) relatively narrow, fused or not, separating a pair of verY large infralabials; a sharply defined post-cephalic fold or folds (Africa) --> 2.2. Posterior margin of rostral shield inclined, irregular; second and third supralabials significantly enlarged; two infralabials, the first markedly enlarged (cf. Fig. 5 in Loveridge, 1941) (West Africa) --> Baikia GrayPosterior margin of rostral shield (and of nasal where present) ascending more or less verti· cally, ]n a smooth, posteriorly swinging curve; supralabials smaller than infralabiaIs. no! enlarged; the second infralabial markedly enlarged (East Africa) --> Ancylocranium Parker.
Amphisbaena bilabialata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small to medium-sized amphisbaenid (maximum total length 390 mm); body moderately slender, head laterally compressed, a little narrower than the body. Rostral scale high, arcuate, forming a cutting edge, more or less keratinized. Mandibular symphysis reaching the levei ofthe suture between prefrontal and nasal. Lateral and ventral sulci present. A short anterior dorsal sulcus, disorganized, at times contracted into a low crest. Tail cylindrical to the levei of the autotomy annulus (seventh), from then on moderately clavate. Tail tip a blunt process, vertically elongate. Autotomy levei marked by an incomplete ventral annulus, between the 7th and 8th tail annuli. Preanal pores none or two, variable in expression, separated by four segments. Body annuli 354-372, with frequent irregularities; tail annuli 15-17. Dorsal segments to a midbody annulus 12-16, ventral segments 16-20. (Vanzolini 1999)DESCRIPTION (Figs. 4-6) In spite of many significant differences, the general plan of head scutellation of bilabialatus is very similar to that of A. kingii. In general there are in the former fewer and relatively larger scales, but their relationships and mechanical functions are clearly the same. Rostral supported behind by the prefrontals which are very large, occupying most of the side of the head, in contact on the midline, not fused in the specimens seen. Frontais small but distinct, oblong, placed between the prefrontals and a subsequent row of scales, made of four median squarish elements in contact with the frontais, and, laterally, of a series of elongate vertical scales, behind the ocular and the labials, variously divided, continuing ventrally into the row of post-genials. This row of scales, which I call the post-frontal annulus, separated from the next one by a deep sulcus, lined with wrinkled skin ( not proper granules), ending a little below the levei of the angle of the mouth. Ocular scale very small, sub-triangular, fitting between the prefrontal, the second supralabial and the post-frontal annulus. Eye inapparent. The only other scale on the face is the nasal, which deeply indents the rostral, rests on the first supralabial and narrowly meets the second one. Nostril pierced well in front. Supralabials two, the second by far the largest. Symphysial somewhat irregular, with small anvil-shaped processes. Postsymphysial elongate, pentagonal, also somewhat irregular, narrowly meeting the first infralabial in front. Geniais, mediai and lateral, rather regular. One single post-genial row, merging into the post-frontal annulus. Dorsal segments squarish, ventral ones a little wider. Longitudinal sutures approximately but not precisely aligned. Lateral sulci normal for amphisbaenids, shallow, consisiting of a succession of X-shaped wrinkles, beginning at the levei of body annulus 70 extending to the last body annulus. Ventral sulcus simply a sharp angle along the line ofmedian segment sutures. The dorsal sulcus may appear only as a short sequence of misaligned irregular segments, or this area may be raised (probably by muscular contraction) in a sort of low crest, some 10 annuli long. The large button on the tip of the tail is not segmented. Preanal flap formed by 10 segments, the central pair largest. Post-anal rim formed by 15-17 segments, squarish on the middle, becoming wrinkled on the sides (Vanzolini 1999).
Amphisbaena kingii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A small amphisbaenid (maximum total length 250mm), body stocky, short-tailed, head laterally compressed, a little narrower than the body. Rostral scale high, arcuate, forming a cutting edge, variously keratinized. Mandibular symphysis reaching the levei of the nostril. Lateral sulci apparent. Dorsal sulcus varying from entirely obsolete to well-expressed. Ventral sulcus inconstant. Tail cylindrical to the autotomy levei, clavate behind that. Tip of tail rounded. Body annuli 214-244, with frequent irregularities. Tail annuli 15-23. Dorsal segments (12-19), narrow, ventral (14-22) squarish, ali reasonably well aligned. Preanal pores usually four, contiguous, in some cases inapparent, if visible varying from slight impressions to small but well defined and pigmented orifices. (Vanzolini 1999)DESCRIPTION: Rostral very large, arcuate, with prominent cutting edge, reaching dorsally the levei of the eye, its hind margin roughly parallel to the edge, variously but never much indented. Supporting the rostral from behind two arches of scales. The anterior one abuts in front and below against the upper half of the nasal. It is constituted by up to 3 elements, that may be ali fused in a single prefrontal. The uppermost scales touch or closely miss each other on the midline; they may be fused there. The second arch supporting the rostral begins behind in a large polygonal, salient scale, that may be called a frontal, in front of which there are usually two polygonal scales, in the position of pre-and supra-oculars. These scales may be occasionally fused or split. Ocular irregularly polygonal; the eye appears as a diffuse spot. Nasals narrow and elongate; nostril pierced near the front edge. Three large supralabials, the first the longest, the second the highest. The first labial is more or less coterminous with the nasal; the second supports the preocular; the ocular rests on the angle between the second and the third supralabials. Behind the latter a row of scales, not showing on the top differentiated parietals or occipitals, but including a large polygonal scale in the position of a postocular; under this a vertical row of three segments, continuing behind the third labial as a body annulus. Symphysial anvil-shaped, squarish. Post-symphysial pentagonal, often irregular. Three infralabials, the second the largest. Genial region extremely variable. On one extreme a regular pattem of normally shaped mediai and lateral geniais, followed by a row of 8 post-genials; fusions and splittings are frequent, however. Lateral body sulci consisting, as usual in amphisbaenids, of a succession of X-shaped wrinkles, beginning between the 15th and 30th body annuli and extending to the last body annulus. A dorsal sulcus is not apparent in about one fifth of the specimens examined. When present it consists of irregularities on the edges of the median segments; in fact, it is never a proper sulcus. The ventral sulcus, absent in one half of the specimens, is, when present, similar to the dorsal one. The conditions of the two sulci are not statistically associated. Body annuli 214-244, with many irregularities, especially incomplete annuli and spiral confluences. Dorsal segments 12-19, longerthan wide. Ventral segments 14-22, squarish. Preanal pores usually 4, widely variable in expression, from very slight impressions to definite rounded, pigmented orifices. In one specimen, and in cases in the literature, no pores could be discerned. The anal flap is composed of 6 scales in palisade. The posterior rim of the anus has 10-12 scales, larger on the middle. Tail cylindrical to the autotomy levei (in ali specimens examined the seventh annulus) which is irregular in extent and outline. Distally the tail is moderately but distinctly clavate; the tip is round, smooth or segmented. There are mentions in the literature of the presence of white spots on the snout and tail. I saw none. All my specimens were gray, somewhat darker on the dorsum, as if countershaded (Vanzolini 1999).
Amphisbaena anomala	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Praemaxillary teeth, 1; maxillaries 4-4 ; mandibulars 6-6. Snout rather prominent, smooth; rostral small; a large nasal on each side of rostral meeting behind that shield on the midcephalic line; a pair of large praefrontals separating the pair of frontals from the nasals; the contour scales extend to these shields, except for several slightly enlarged scales which might be considered occipitals. It is not impossible that some would consider the scutes here called frontals, as really parietals. Eye invisible in a medium-sized ocular; this is bounded anteriorly by the first labial (which extends upward to the praefrontal), inferiorly by the third labial, and posteriorly by the upper of the two first temporals. These two temporals are followed by three smaller ones. There are but three supralabials. The infralabials are also three, the second largest. A large median chin shield is in contact with the first and second lower labials; also a pair of large chin shields are in contact with the second and third lower labials and are separated from each other by five other shields posterior to the large median chin shield mentioned above. One hundred and ninety-one annuli on body; three complete caudal annuli anterior to the ring-groove, and ten posterior to it. An annulus about the middle of the body contains sixteen dorsal and twenty ventral segments, the ventral segments being much larger than the dorsal. The pectoral shields consist of about sixteen scutes, four rows of four scales each, the two median rows largest. All the scales somewhat irregular in shape and position and a few partially fused together. Preanal scales, two large in median position, flanked on each side by three smaller scales. (Barbour 1914).DIAGNOSIS: An amphisbaenian with a vertically compressed head, paired cephalic shields posterior to the rostral, an unsegmented gular fold, traces of a pectoral shield, two dermal annuli for each vetebra, a single precloacalpore on each side, and a well-defined autotomy annulus (Barbour 1914).Definition (genus Aulura): The snout is spatulate with its tip formed by the rostral, followed by pairs of large nasals, prefrontals, and frontals along the dorsal surface of head. The nostrils open on the ventral surface of the snout. The gular region hasa nonsegmented fold, the pectoral region shows enlarged segments and there are two body annuli for each trunk vertebra and one caudal annulus for each caudal vertebra (cf. Alexander and Gans, 1966). There is a very well-defined autotomy annulus, and precloacal pores (scars) lie lateral rather than anterior to the precloacal shield of males (females). The skull has not yet been described. (Gans 1971: 7)Diagnosis (species): Gans 1971: 8Detailed description: Gans 1971: 8DEFINITION: A medium-sized amphisbaenian with a head set off by a narrowed neck from a somewhat thicker trunk and a wide and spatulate snout that forms a sharp anterior edge but is not keratinized. There is a rostral followed by four supralabials on each side, and pairs of nasals, very large prefrontals and large frontals cover the head anterior to the first body annulus. The postgenials are followed immediately by an unsegmented gular fold, posterior to which come some four to five narrow annuli, followed by four or five whose ventral segments are enlarged or fused into a poorly modified pectoral shield. A single precloacal pore or pore scar lies lateral to each end of the precloacal row, and the tail is short and equipped with a very narrow autotomy site after which it bulges. The dorsal surface bears faintly knobbed segments. There are 182 to 192 body annuli; 13 to 14 caudal annuli; and 16 to 20 dorsal and 18 to 20 ventral segments to a midbody annulus. Dorsal and ventral sulci are absent, but the lateral sulci are very clearly marked. Pigmentation is brown dorsally, lighter ventrally; the segments of the anterior third of the body are evenly pigmented, whereas more posterior ones show concentration in the segmental centers (Gans 1971).
Baikia africana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description (genus): “The head compressed, elevated; rostral plate very large, compressed, forming an arched crest from the mouth to the forehead, with a groove on the hinder part over the nostrils crown with two pairs of band-like shields behind the upper edge of the rostral, the front pair narrow eye-shield very minute eye invisible; temples with two small shields the upper labial shields 3-3; the second upper large, produced, keeled on the side; the hinder, under the temporal shield, larger, square lower lip covered with a single large shield on each side, separated by a square inferior rostral shield and by two small gular plates placed one behind the other; nostrils large, lateral, under the edge of the keel of the frontals. Body and chest covered with rings of similar oblong square shields; preanal pores '2-2, separated by a central shield. Tail cylindrical, rather conical at the tip. In spirits the skin is loose and inclined to form a fin-like fold, sometimes on one and sometimes on another part of the body, with a central longitudinal ventral groove, without any appearance of a lateral line.” (Gray 1865)Description: “Head strongly compressed laterally ; an enormous composite rostral with sharp cutting edge in a median vertical plane; pectoral segments not enlarged; no vertebral line, a lateral line, no ventral line; a circular fold dividing the head from the body; precloacal pores present; tail cylindrical with rounded blunt tip. Specifically, the rostral is fused with the prefrontals, frontal, preoculars and partly to the nasals; nasals demarcated on three sides but fused anteriorly to the compound rostral shield; a pair of postfrontals elongate transversely and in contact below with the 2nd supralabial and ocular; ocular very small and triangular in shape (sometimes absent altogether on one or both sides) in contact with the postfrontal, parietal, temporal and the 2nd and 3rd supralabials; eye usually visible and positioned near the upper part of the anterior border of the 3rd supralabial; a pair of parietals which are noticeably narrower than the postfrontals and flanked on each side by enlarged temporal shields. Five small postparietals or occipitals. Mental quadrilateral with curved posterior border, sometimes fused to the elongate post-mental; the first and and infralabials fused to form a large anterior infralabial; the posterior infralabial (3rd) small and separate. Behind the fused Ist and and infralabials and medial to the 3rd infralabial are the symmetrical enlarged malar shields. Between the malar shields there are two rows of postgenials (chin shields), an anterior row of 4 segments and a posterior row of n segments. Body cylindrical with bilateral grooves extending to the cloaca; body annuli 247-254; lateral annuli 3-4; caudal annuli 20-22, (ten of the eleven known examples being intact with unbroken tails). Segments in a midbody annulus 29-38 (15-20+ 14-18), the mid-ventral segments being broader than long. Precloacal pores 4 in both males and females. Precloacal segments (anals) 10-12, the lateral segments being subdivided into anterior and posterior portions usually. (Dunger 1968) Size: Total length between 188 and 226mm; tail length 1 8.5 to 20 mm; width 4.4 to 5•0 mm. (Dunger 1968)Colour: Pink generally, the head being lighter than the body. The species turns blue when deoxygenated and after death in preservative it is white. Record: Mokwa, near Jebba.” (Dunger 1968)
Amphisbaena bedai	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis:  Tail slightly clavate. Nasals meeting on the midline. Parietals large. Four supralabials, fourth small. Four preanal pores, the pore-bearing scales separated on the middle by two large scales of the anal flap. Body annuli 272-284, tail annuli 22-23, segments to a midbody annulus 18-20 (total 34-36). (Vanzolini 1991).Description: Head triangular, narrower than the body, with strongly curved profile: snout prognathous. Lateral sulcus evident from the 25th-30th body annulus, no dorsal or ventral sulci. Tail slightly clavate.Rostral well visible from above. Nasals meeting on the midline, their suture the shortest on top of the head. Prefrontals large. Frontals forming together a rough diamond, narrower, rounded behind, their suture the longest on top of the head. Parietals large, in one case irregularly broken up, in another transversely split, sitting on the middle of an annulus of successively decreasing segments. Nostril near the front edge of the nasal. Four upper labials, the first with an upper point just failing to meet the prefrontal; the second and third large, irregularly trapezoidal; the fourth small, squarish. Ocular very irregular. A very large postocular, pentagonal, with unequal sides; between it and the fourth labial one trapezoid scale, narrower below. Symphysial anvil-shaped, with large antero-lateral processes, pointed or rounded behind. Postsymphysial shield-shaped, with arcuate front edge (receiving the symphysial) and rounded angles. Lateral genials large, irregular. Median genials four, the two median ones large, regular, the lateral ones reduced to slivers. Three lower labials, the first irregular, the second very large, the third small, elongate, irregular. Between the third labials eight irregular scales, the laterals large.Dorsal segments a little longer than wide, poorly aligned, with many irregularities; many of them with a central round depression. Ventral segments more regular, better aligned, the median pair a little wider than long. Anal flap with two central scales, very large, separating the porebearing scales. Two pores on each side, small, well formed, on the middle of the scales. Tail with an autotomy level on the sixth annulus; point of tail slightly laterally compressed (higher than wide), with distinct sutures.Dorsum brown, to the level of the lateral sulcus, occasionally 1-2 scales below it; many segments with darker markings, irregularly distributed; intersegmental sutures lighter. Ventral parts yellowish. Tail as body, but with large whitish irregular spots dorsally; ventrally with some light smudging on the sixth annulus and those immediately behind. (Vanzolini 1991).Comparisons: Bronia bedai shares with B. brasiliana and B. kraoh a set of characters in common with Amphisbaena, the most species-rich genus in the family, from which they differ in having a strongly curved skull (Figs. 9 and 10), with a short but distinct vertical rostrum, as well as the pore-bearing scales of either side separated on the middle by a pair of large scales of the anal flap.Bronia bedai is closest to B. kraoh (figs. 5-8); especially, both have the nasals meeting on the midline, a more primitive situation than that shown by B. brasiliana, which has extremely reduced nasals, in some specimens partially or completely fused with the rostral. They also coincide in number of body annuli, 272-284 in the new species, 281 in kraoh, while brasiliana does not exceed 229.Bronia bedai has more tail annuli than B. kraoh (respectively 22-23 and 13) and fewer segments to a midbody annulus (34:36 against 18-20:16-18). It has four pores; there are six in kraoh. On the top of .the head, kraoh has no parietals; on the side, the ocular of kraoh is much larger, and the postocular consequently smaller; the fourth labial of kraoh is much larger. (Vanzolini 1991).
Amphisbaena brasiliana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (Bronia): Head ovate, räther convex; rostral shield very large, hemispherical, with the small nasal shields inserted in notches on its hinder edge, which is placed over the front labial; crown convex, rounded. on the side, covered with two pairs of shields; the front pair square, the hinder smaller, triangular, with a small triangular occipital shield on its outer side; eye-shield triangular; labial shields 3--3 2-23 the second upper and front lower large; gular shield single, square, with d cross series of shields behind it. Body cylindrical ; lateral line well marked, the dorsal shields elongate, narrow; the ventral ones rather broader, smooth; preanal pores four; the preanal shields six or eight, the central pair largest, the lateral ones very small. Tail blunt.” (Gray 1865)Description (genus Bronia): The prognathous snout is relatively short, pointed, slightly compressed laterally, dorsally convex, and strongly bent. The nasals are small, never contact each other, and are partially fused to the very large rostral. The bluntly conical tail lacks an autotomy plane. Precloacal pores are present.Vanzolini (1951) noted that the skull is "similar to that of Amphisbaena" and that the dentition is 7 (premaxilla), 5 (maxilla), and 8 (dentary). (Gans 1971: 13)Original description (species): “Pale brown; dorsal shields with a dark central spot.” (Gray 1865)Diagnosis (species): “An amphisbaenian with a short, rounded head that is slightlycompressed laterally. Prefrontal but not nasals (the suture separating these from the rostral may be partially missing) lie in medial contact. There are four round precloacal pores in a medially interrupted row, and caudal autotomy is absent. (Gans 1971: 13)DEFINITION: A medium-sized amphisbaenian with a small, short, domed head that shows some lateral compression. The rostral tip of large specimens is faintly keratinized. The rostral covers the prognathous snout. On each side the rostral is flanked by and keeps from medial contact a sometimes but partially separated nasal in which the nostril is pierced so that it faces the lateral aspect of the head. Enormous paired prefrontals are followed by medium-sized frontals. The number of labials is irregular, and there is one postgenial and a postmalar row. Four, small, round precloacal pores are arranged in a medially interruped row and the tail is blunt and lacks an autotomy constriction. There are 213 to 229 body annuli; 11 to 15 caudal annuli; and 18 to 21 dorsal and 18 to 21 ventral segments to a mid-body annulus. Dorsal and ventral sulci are absent, but the lateral sulci are clearly marked. The dorsal region of body and tail is pigmented in brown, emphasizing the segmental centers, and starting two to three segments dorsal to the lateral lines. (Gans 1971: 13)Detailed description (species): Gans 1971: 15
Amphisbaena kraoh	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Nasals meeting on the midline; 4 supralabials; 281 body annuli; 13 subequal tail annuli; median pair of preanal segments very large, extending forward and dividing the pore-bearing row in two separate halves, each one with 3 pores  (Vanzolini 1971).DESCRIPTION: Head laterally compressed, high. Rostral not readily visible from above. Nasals very large, forming a short median suture. Prefrontals subrectangular, very large. Frontals broad in front, narrow behind. Supralabials 4, second and third very high, fourth small, square. Ocular very large, in contact with the second and third labials, the prefrontal, the frontal (very short contact) and the 2 upper temporals. A vertical row of 3 temporals, the two inferior similar to the fourth labial, the uppermost larger, irregularly trapezoidal. Symphysial small, anvil- shaped. Infralabials 3, second very large. Postsymphysial pentagonal, moderate, with concave anterior margin, followed by a row of scales with transverse posterior margins, at the level of the third labial. Lateral sulci strong, dorsal poorly marked, ventral indicated by preferential folding. Body annuli 281. Segments to a midbody annulus 28/24. Preanal region characteristic: the two median elements are very large, and extend forwards, interrupting the pore-bearing row; three small pores on each side of this pair of large scales. Tail with 15-16 annuli, the distal sutures and segments poorly defined. Dorsum dark straw colored, venter lighter. On the median third of the body the dorsal segments have a small central dark spot. 304 + 18 mm. The name refers to the Krao Indians, in whose area H. Schultz, an anthropologist, was working when he collected the specimen (Vanzolini 1971).
Amphisbaena bahiana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small to medium-sized form of Amphisbaena wirbout major fusions of head shields; rhe head with very !arge prefrontals, short frontals and !arge parierals. The vertically compressed head is of approximarely equal diameter to the trunk and the nuchal region is only faintly constricted. The rostral rip projects but slightly over the lower jaw. The form has 204 to 223 body and 14 to 16 caudal annuli; the last of which surrounds the base of the vertically kee!ed conically segmented caudal tip; there may be an autotomy site corresponding to the extremely faintly narrowed fourth or fifth caudal annulus; 12 to 16 dorsal and 14 to 16 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and four precloacal pores in a conrinuous series. Only rhe lateral sulci are srrongly indicated. Specimens are brown dorsally, pigmented most densely on the dorsal surface of the tail; lighter ventrally, the lightening produced by depigmentation and dropping out of color by segments. (Gans 1964: 412)Detailed description: Gans 1964: 412
Amphisbaena borelli	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small to medium sized form of Amphisbaena without major fusions of head shields, though part of the naserostral suture is lost in adults; with enormous prefrontals; with extensive posterior prolongation of frontals and enlargement of the poscoculars. The laterally compressed head is markedly arched, significandy smaller in diameter than the trunk, and set off from this by faint nuchal constriction. The rostral rip projects strongly beyend the lower jaw. The form has 239 to 245 body annuli; 17 t0 19 caudal annuli; the last of which surrounds the base of the vertically keeled caudal tip; possibly an autotomy site at the sixth to eighth caudal annulus; 14 to 16 dorsal and 16 to 20 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and 4 precloacal pores in interrupted series. Only the lateral sulci are strongly indicated. Specimens have brown dorsal pigmentation, more emphasized in the center of a segment. This drops out by segments ventrally. (Gans 1964: 397)Detailed description: Gans 1964: 399
Amphisbaena roberti	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis : A small to medium-sized form of Amphisbaena without major fusions of head shields; with enormous prefrontals; and generally with very !arge first, occasionally with slightly enlarged second parierals. The snout is swollen. The dorsal surface of the head shows variable arch.ing, but lirtle or no lateral compression. The head is significantly smaller in diameter than the anterior trunk and set off from this by a nuchal constriction. The rostral tip projects strongly over the lower jaw. The form has 240 to 265 body annuli; 17 to 20 caudal annuli on the club-shaped tail, the last of which surrounds the base of the vertically keeled segmented caudal tip covered by conical segments and the mid-group of which lies in a posteriorly directed chevron pattern on the dorsal surface; a faint (autotomy) constriction may be noted at the seventh or eighth caudal annulus; 13 to 16, generally 14 to 16 dorsal, and 12 to 16, generally 14 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and two round to faintly oval precloacal pores close to the midline. Dorsal and lateral sulci are strongly indicated. Specimens are brown dorsally, the color expressed most strongly in the center of the segment. Ventral countershading occurs by pigment lightening and segmental drop-out. Some specimens have a small, round, densely pigmented dot or ring in the center of each dorsal and lateral segment. (Gans 1964: 402)Detailed description: Gans 1964: 402; see Vanzolini 1991 for a detailed analysis on geographic variation.
Amphisbaena steindachneri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small to medium sized form of Amphisbaena without major fusions of head shields, though part of the nasorostral suture is lost; with \ enormous prefrontals; with extensive posterior prolongation of the frontals and enlargement of the postoculars. The laterally compressed head is arched and significantly smaller in diameter than the trunk, and set off from this by a nuchal constriction. The rostral tip projects strongly over the lower jaw. The form has 256 to 266 body annuli; 17 to 18 caudal annuli, the last of which surrounds the base of the vertically keeled caudal tip, possibly an autotoiny site at the seventh caudal annulus; 14 to 16 dorsal and 16 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; and four precloacal pores in an interrupted series. Only the lateral sulci are strongly indicated. All available specimens are completely faded. (Gans 1964: 391)Detailed description: Gans 1964: 391
Chirindia ewerbecki	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: “Die Gattung Chirindia wurde Von BOULENGER in den Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. (7) XII, 1907, D). 48, für eine kleine Amphisbäne aus dem Chirinda-Wald in Mashonaland aufgestellt. Von der einzigen bekannten Art, Ch. swynnertoni, unterscheidet sich unsere neue Art leicht durch folgende Merkmale: Zwischen Postfrontal- und Parietalschild einer-, dem Mundrand andererseits liegt nur ein einziges großes Schild (4 kleinere bei Ch. sw.); das Auge liegt nicht im vorderen, sondern in dem zweiten, den Oberlippenrand begrenzenden Schild. Schließlich ist auch noch das große erste Sublabiale durch ein viereckiges, an das Symphysiale anstoßendes, unpaares Schildchen von dem der anderen Seite getrennt. 12 dorsale, 12 ventrale Segmente an einem Ringel des Rumpfes. Zahl der Rumpfringel etwa 290. Totallänge 150 + ? mm (Schwanzspitze fehlt).” (Werner 1910: 37)Description. Rostral moderate, triangular; nasal fused with first and second labials, preocular, ocular, prefrontal and frontal, forming long suture with its fellow behind the rostral; no prefrontals; no frontal; a pair of postfrontals1 (followed by a pair of temporals broadly in contact on the median line and followed by) a pair of parietals; 1-2 pairs of poorly defined occipitals (in first annulus); no supraocular; no preocular; no ocular, eye usually distinguishable under posterior edge of fused nasal; 1 (third) upper labial in contact with postfrontal; 2-3 temporals, upper in contact with postfrontal, parietal, labial and anterior lower temporal; mental elongate, subtriangular; 3 lower labials, first very large, second very small; postmental small; 2 + 3, 3 + 3 and 2 + 4 chin shields; 264-2802 annuli on body; 25-28 on tail; 22-24 (10-12 + 12) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two times as broad as long; 6 anals, the outer ones frequently subject to division; 6 preanal pores in male, 0 in female. (Loveridge 1941: 392)Dentition. Premaxillary teeth 7; maxillaries 4-4; mandibulars 7-7. (Loveridge 1941: 392)Measurements. Largest & (MCZ 47922) measures 150 (133 + 17) mm., largest 9 (MCZ 47934) measures 154 (137 + 17) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 392)
Chirindia langi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description: Snout rounded and strongly projecting. Rostral moderate, triangular and followed by a pair of large shields (formed by the fusing together of the nasal, first upper labial, preocular and prefrontal), which are in long contact with one another behind rostral. A pair of subtriangular postfrontals forming a long median suture, and in contact behind with a pair of polygonal parietals, which in turn are followed by two pairs of occipitals, the anterior pair of which are broader than long and just meet one another at a point mesially, while the posterior pair are longer than broad and form part of the first annulus on nape. Four temporals, the upper anterior largest, obliquely elongate and in contact with postfrontal, parietal and 3rd upper labial. Second upper labial fused with ocular into a single elongate boomerang-shaped shield (in contact with postfrontal above), below the upper •part of which the eye is just discernible. Third upper labial large and just meeting postfrontal at a point . above. Mental elongate, subtriangular and sharply pointed behind. Three lower labials, 1st very large and just meeting its fellow at a point behind mental, 2nd and 3rd very small, Postmental small, triangular, with its apex directed anteriorly. Two sublabialson either side bordering 2nd and 3rd lower labials, the anterior pair separated across throat by two transverse rows of small chin-shields (4 in each row) and posterior pair by a single row of 7-8 scales. 286-290 Annuli on body and 30-32 on tail; an annulus about middle of body made up of 28 (i.e. 14 dorsal and 14 ventral) segments; dorsai and lateral segments a little longer than broad, two median rows of ventrals 1½ times as broad as long. Six elongate narrow anal segments and four preanal pores (in males). Tail rounded at end; caudal segments much larger than on body. (Fitzsimons 1943: 381)Colour: Flesh colour, tinged with mauve above. (Fitzsimons 1943: 381)Dimensions: Type (T.M. 19197-Punda Maria), H. & B. 112.5, tail 15.5, diam. body 2.6 mm. (Fitzsimons 1943: 381)
Chirindia mpwapwaensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: [differences to orientalis indicated by *]. Of similar appearance to Amphisbaenula orientalis from which it differs in possessing an *ocular scale which *separates the frontal from the first labial, which is the *smallest; second labial largest; three scales bordering the upper lip besides the rostral; the first being a fusion of prefrontals, nostril, and former first labial; followed by two upper labials; a pair of frontals forming a *sexagon; a pair of parietals *smaller than the frontals; chin-shields 1+3+4; tem- porals 2, the uppermost being in contact with the frontal; *273 body segments; *30 midbody annuli (*14 above, *16 below); *26 caudal annuli; 6 preanal pores. In the paratype the outline of frontals and parietals is less regular I than in the type; chin-shields 1+*4+4; temporals 3 (the larger upper one of the type being divided horizontally); *269 body segments; 5 preanal pores, very indistinct. (Loveridge 1932: 379)Coloration in life. Male, female. Flesh-pink. (Loveridge 1932: 379)Measurements. Type male. Head and body 175,  tail 19 mm. Paratype female. Head and body 147 mm., tail 15 mm. (Loveridge 1932: 379)
Chirindia rondoensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. Nearly related to A. ewerbecki (Werner) from which it differs in invariably possessing 10 dorsal and 10 ventral segments in a midbody annulus, 227-247 annuli on body and 24-28 on tail. Native name. Livilurilu (Kimera). (Loveridge 1941: 394)Description. Rostral moderate, triangular; nasal fused with first and second labials, preocular, ocular, prefrontal and frontal, forming a long suture with its fellow behind the rostral; no prefrontals; no frontal; a pair of postfrontals (followed by a pair of temporals broadly in contact on the median line and followed by) a pair of parietals; 1-2 pairs of poorly defined occipitals (in first annulus); no supraocular; no preocular; no ocular, eye usually distinguishable under posterior edge of fused nasal; 1 (third) upper labial narrowly in contact with postfrontal; 2 (17 ex.) or 3 (30 ex.) temporals, upper broadly in contact with its fellow on the median line, lower (sometimes divided to give off a small posterior one) immediately posterior to the single Surviving labial (it might well be mistaken for a labial), in one specimen (M. C. Z. 47991) what would have been a third temporal has fused with the parietal above it; mental elongate, subtriangular; 3 lower labials, first very large, second very small; postmental small; 2 + 4 chin shields; 227-247 annuli on body; 23-28 on tail; 20 (10 + 10) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two times as broad as long; 6 anals, the outer ones frequently subject to division; 6 preanal pores in male, 0 in female. (Loveridge 1941: 394)Dentition. Premaxillary teeth 7; maxillaries 4-4; mandibulars 6-6.1 (Loveridge 1941: 394)Coloration. In life, vivid flesh pink. In alcohol, pallid pink. (Loveridge 1941: 394)Measurements. Largest a (Type. MCZ. 47,951) measures 140 (122 + 18) mm., largest 9 (Paratype. MCZ. 47,952) measures 146.5 (129 + 17.5) mm. Males average smaller than females. (Loveridge 1941: 394)
Chirindia swynnertoni	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (genus): “Distinguished from Amphisbaena by the absence of an ocular shield, the eye being situated under the posterior part of a large shield (nasal + labial + praefrontal + ocular) covering each side of the snout, and by the absence of preanal pores. Teeth very small.” (from BOULENGER 1907). Description: Snout rounded, moderately projecting. Rostral small and triangular, followed by a pair of very large shields (formed by the fusing together of the nasal, first and second upper labials, preocular, ocular and prefrontal), which are in long contact with one another behind the rostral. Following this pair of large shields is a pair of small trapezoidal postfrontals, behind which • the large polygonal upper temporals are in contact with one another for some distance mesially. A pair of moderately enlarged parietals (distinctly smaller than the preceding temporals), followed by a pair of much smaller trapezoidal occipitals, which form part of the first annulus on nape. Five temporals, the upper anterior largest and forming a suture with its fellow between postfrontals and parietals (see above). Mental elongate, subtriangular and pointed behind. Three lower labials, 1st very large and in short contact with its fellow behind: mental, thus separating latter from the small pentagonal postmental; 2nd and 3rd lower labials very small. Two sublabials on each side, bordering 2nd and 3rd lower labials, the anterior pair separated across throat by the postmental and two small triangular chin-shields, and the posterior pair by a row of three small chin-shields. 246 Annuli on body and 24 on tail; an annulus about middle of body made up of 24 (i.e. 12 dorsal and 12 ventral) segments; dorsal and lateral segments longer than broad, but two median ventral rows twice as broad as long. Anal segments feebly enlarged; no preanal pores. Tail obtusely rounded at end. (Fitzsimons 1943: 382)Colour: Flesh colour, tinged with purplish. (Fitzsimons 1943: 382)Dimensions: Type (after Boulenger), H. & B. 121, tail 14, diam. body 3 mm. (Fitzsimons 1943: 382)
Cynisca bifrontalis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: Boulenger 1906: 202DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, preocular, and prefrontal fused, with blind suture entering fused shield from the anterior tip of the rectangular ocular. Subrectangular frontal and larger parietal discrete with long medial contact on midline; occipitals tiny. First postocular supralabial contacts frontal. A single very large temporal lies dorsal to the first postsupralabial and is followed by two smaller ones dorsal to the second. Head bulbous. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental wider than first infralabials; malars slightly enlarged, enclosing two rows of postgenials, 4 segments in the first row, 4 in the second. 240 body annuli (tail autotomized). Midbody segments, 8 dorsal, 8 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 10 (poorly expressed) precloacal pores (in female holotype). Autotomy site at the 11th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 32)Description (Pattern XIII): Meristic characters are summarized in table 1. Figures 16 and 7 show the views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. The type is faded to a uniform pale brown. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is relatively small and not visible in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by enormous paired shields that cover the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, the nasals, the preoculars, and the prefrontals; the vertical posterior suture of these shields with the third supralabial (first postocular supralabial) bisects the position of the eye. There iS no supraocular. The rectangular ocular is diagonally placed near the upper two-thirds of the supralabial suture. A blind suture extends anteriorly into the compound shield from its anterior corner. The posterior corner gives rise to the medial suture of the second supralabial (or first postocular one) with the frontal. The shallowly convex anterior edge of the frontal is followed by a straight inward-angling suture with the supralabial, a short even more angling suture with the large temporal, and a transverse suture with the large hexagonal parietal. The posteriorly asymmetrical parietals are but slightly narrower, but much longer than the frontals. Laterally, each parietal is in contact with a hexagonal temporal and it in turn with the rectangular postsupralabial. The right side of the dorsal half-annulus of the second body annulus includes the tiny occipital (fused to the parietal on the left side), which is smaller and shorter than the gabled flanking shields, each of which inserts between a parietal and temporal. Consequently, the enlarged cephalic shields only include the dorsal segments of the first two body annuli. The snout is prognathous and the rostral is visible only in ventral view. The deep lower jaw is partially inserted into the bulbous snout which is almost twice as wide as high. In ventral view, the mental is slightly narrower than the enormous infralabials; however, the area of the latter is greater. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials cross the chin at the level of the second infralabials; along the posteromedial portion of the infralabials this suture swings slightly antero-medially SO that the widened malars correspond to two rows of four postgenials, rather than single row. The second infralabials are small and their anterior suture extends anteriorly from the junction with the malars to the lip. Two wide segments, flanked by a narrower one on each side, occupy the first postmental row; the latter elements lie medial to the malars, but posterior to the first infralabials. The segments of the gular region (annuli one through four) are slightly reduced in size and the midventral segments of the next annulus show the widening of the medial segments. The type has 240 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. There are no obvious fusions, except for a spiral displacement just anterior to the cloaca; the four anteriormost dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody an annulus contains eight squarish to longer than wide dorsal segments and eight ventral ones, the medial about 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three lateral annuli. The healed autotomized tail bears 11 caudal annuli before an oval end. There are eight precloacal pore scars lacking secretion cores, each inserted into the center of the posterior edge of one of the narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus. This set corresponds to the width of the enlarged pair of medial ventral segments. The rounded precloacal shield consists of two very wide median plus three left and two right narrower flanking segments, some of which extend laterally beyond the round portion. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of 12 segments. The trunk is generally rounded; however, it becomes slightly wider than high just anterior to the cloacal region and the tail is flattened (which may be an artifact of preservation). The healed caudal tip forms a distinct horizontal oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 12th body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately one-third the width of a flanking segment. Anteriorly (for the first 70 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. There IS no ventral sulcus. (Gans 1987: 32)
Cynisca degrysi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Rostral moderate, triangular; nasal fused with first and second labials, preocular and prefrontal, forming a long suture with its fellow behind the rostral; no prefrontals; frontal small; a pair of postfrontals; a pair of parietals; no occipitals; no supraocular; no preocular; ocular large, eye distinct; 1 (third) upper labial; 2 temporals, upper very large, forming an extensive suture with a postfrontal and parietal; mental elongate; 2 lower labials, first very large, second small; no postmental; 4 chin shields, all of which are in contact with a first lower labial; 243 annuli on body, 26 on tail; 17 (10 + 7) segments in a midbody annulus, the median ventral segment six times as broad as long; 6 anals; preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941)Coloration. Above, pale brown; below, white. (Loveridge 1941)Measurements. Total length 120 (107 + 13) mm. (Loveridge 1941) Remarks. Obviously derived from Amphisbaeua leonina of Tumbo Island, French Guinea, from which it differs in having 26 annuli (instead of 20) on tail; in 17 (instead of 24) segments in a midbody annulus, the median ventral segments being 6 (instead of less than 2) times as broad as long; absence (instead of 3-6) of preanal pores; and of doubtful consequence, no postmental, it having divided longitudinally to form 4 chin shields.DIAGNOSIS (after original description; type never illustrated): Preocular supralabials, nasal, preocular, and prefrontal fused. Ocular discrete (large). A small median azygous shield. Frontals and parietals large and discrete, no occipitals (?). 2 temporals, upper very large, forming an extensive suture with frontal and parietal. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental elongate, between large first infralabials; no postmental. 4 postgenials. 243 body annuli; 26 (or fewer) caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 10 dorsal, 7 ventral. Median ventral segments azygous. No precloacal pores. (6 precloacal segments.) Snout-vent plus tail length, 107 + 13 mm. (Gans 1987)
Cynisca feae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: Boulenger 1906: 203Description. Rostral moderate, triangular; nasal fused with first and second labials, preocular, ocular, prefrontal and frontal, forming a long suture with its fellow behind the rostral; no prefrontals; no frontal; a pair of elongate postfrontals; no parietals(obviously fused with postfrontals); no occipitals (obviously fused with postfrontals); no supraocular; no preocular; no ocular (its former position indicated by a groove), eye hidden; 1 (third) upper labial; 2 temporals, upper very large, forming an extensive suture with a postfrontal; mental elongate; 2 lower labials, first very large,second small; no postmental (obviously fused with mental); no chin shields; 252-258 annuli on body, 9-24 on tail; 19 (12 + 7) segments in a midbody annulus, the median ventral segment six times as broad as long; 4 anals; 6 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 401)Coloration. Above, pale brown; below, white. (Loveridge 1941: 401)Measurements. Total length 175 (160 + 15) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 401) DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, prefrontal, preocular, and ocular fused, with blind suture entering fused shield from above the level of the eye. Frontal, parietal, and occipital (?) fused. First postocular supralabial contacts frontal. A single very large temporal lying dorsal to the first postsupralabial is followed by two smaller ones dorsal to the second postsupralabial. Head bulbous. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental wider than first infralabials in ventral view; malars enlarged, but most posterior chin segments subequal. 244-265 body annuli; 20-25 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 12-14 dorsal, 7-9 ventral. Median ventral segments azygous. 6 precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 6th and 8th caudal annulus.DESCRIPTION (Pattern X): Meristic characters are summarized in table 7. Figures 17 and 7 show the views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are a uniform pale brown dorsally and are slightly lighter on the ventral surface. The pigment density increases posteriorly and is greatest on the first half of the tail. Here there is a tendency for faint concentration of pigment in the segmental centers. The dorsal surface of the head and first five to seven dorsal half-annuli lack pigmentation, as do the second infralabials, though the rest of the chin iS pigmented. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is relatively small and barely visible in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by enormous paired shields that cover the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, the nasals, the oculars, and the prefrontals; the vertical posterior suture of these shields either bisects or follows just anterior to the position of the eye. A diagonally running blind suture extends into this compound shield from just above the level of the eye, and passes ventrolateral. The position of the former ocular would correspond to the zone just ventral and posterior to this suture (a ventral suture remains azygously on CZL 1945.138). The second supralabial (or first postocular one) extends dorsally to the level where the blind suture terminates and is in broad horizontal contact with the parallel-sided widened anterior portion of the bottle-shaped frontal-parietal-occipital shield. (There is some question whether these compound. shields include fused occipitals as a few specimens show enlargement of the median segments of the first postcephalic annulus.) Immediately posterior to contact with the second supralabial, the fused median shields narrow sharply or gradually and extend to the first dorsal half-annulus. In some specimens (BM 1946.9.1.13) both the medial and lateral sutures of the median shields may be interrupted and irregular in the transition zone. An enormous temporal shield lies lateral to the frontal-parietal-occipital and between the medial portion of the second supralabial and the frst dorsal half-annulus (which corresponds to the third ventral one). The temporal abuts ventrally onto the rectangular postsupralabial (or onto one or two squarish postsupralabials), though the several sutures tend to be shallowly inscribed and may be missing. The fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first two body annuli. The snout is prognathous and the rostral IS obvious in ventral, but not in dorsal view. The lower jaw is not particularly deeply inserted into the bulbous snout, which is almost twice as wide as high. In ventral view, the mental is larger than the infralabials; however, the area of the latter is greater. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials crosses the chin at the anterior level of the second infralabials; this suture often swings slightly anteromedially, and the enlarged malars generally correspond to two rows of postgenials, rather than a single one. The second infralabials are small; their anterior suture extends anteriorly from the malar junction to the lip. Only the medial pair of the two segments occupying the postmalar position is regularly larger than the segments of posterior body annuli. One wide or two narrow median segments lie back of the center of the mental; they form the center of the first of two rows generally containing four postgenials each. The segments of the gular region are slightly reduced in size and the midventral segments of the seventh annulus show the first indication of fusion of the medial segments. There are 244-265 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portions of the seven to eight discrete dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody an annulus contains 12 to 14 (generally 14) squarish to longer than wide dorsal segments and seven to nine ventral ones (generally seven or nine), the unpaired medial ones more than four times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 20 to 25 caudal annuli before an oval end, which is generally twice or more as long as the last annulus and bears faintly indented sutures only near its anterior edge. An autotomy site is marked at the sixth through eighth postcloacal annulus. It iS always well defined, being slightly narrowed and more intensely pigmented than other caudals. Ten of 32 specimens had broken tails. In some specimens, the first caudal annulus bears an azygous midventral segment; all other segments are paired. There are six variably produced precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of the posterior edge of one of the six (five in ZMU 31184) narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus. This set corresponds to the width of the fused, azygous ventral segments and is flanked on each side by a larger segment that reaches laterally to the edge of the crescentic precloacal shield. The shield consists of two very wide median plus a pair of narrower and triangular flanking segments. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of eight to ten segments. The trunk is generally slightly wider than high; however, it becomes rounded and slightly higher than wide just posterior to the cloacal region. The caudal tip forms a distinct vertical oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the tenth body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately as wide as half of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 70 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and it continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. There iS no ventral sulcus. (Gans 1987: 35)
Cynisca gansi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A medium sized member of the genus Cynisca showing major fusions of the head shields, namely fusion of the 1st and 2nd supralabials with the nasal, prefrontal, frontal, preocular and ocular shields. A pair of postfrontals together forming an irregular oval more convex posteriorly than anteriorly-the posterior limits of these postfrontals may be partly or wholly absent resulting in partial or complete fusion with the parietals behind. A pair of large parietals. A pair of small interparietals of regular shape and size. Fusion of the 1st and 2nd supralabials; a large posterior (3rd) supralabial. Fusion of the 1st and 2nd infralabials; a small posterior (3rd) infralabial. Mental fused to the postmental; the postgenials in two rows, an anterior containing 3 segments and a posterior containing 4 segments. Postgenials flanked by symmetrical enlarged malar shields. Body annuli 229-237; lateral annuli 2-4; caudal annuli 22-23 with the constriction for autotomy after the 7th or 8th caudal annulus. Ten precloacal pores in the male and none in the female; 6-8 precloacal and 8-11 post-cloacal segments surround the cloacal slit (from Dunger 1968).DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, prefrontal, preocular, and (probably) ocular fused. No blind suture enters fused shield. Small frontal; enormous parietal and small occipital discrete. First postocular supralabial in point or narrow contact with the rounded lateral tip of the frontal. Parietal includes temporal region dorsal to the postocular supralabial, the first and the second postsupralabial, and displaces some laterodorsal temporal segments of the third (occipital) and even the fourth body annulus. Snout bulbous, but head pointed. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental shorter than first infralabials, narrower in ventral view; followed by a squarish median segment of the first postgenial row that is flanked by small triangular segments. Squarish malars enlarged, enclosing the posterior portion of the first and all -of the second postgenial row, containing three and four segments, respectively. 228-235 body annuli; 21-22 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 12 dorsal, 10 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 10 or 0 precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 7th to 8th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 37)DESCRIPTION (Pattern VIII): The meristic characters are summarized in table 2. Figures 18 and 7 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small. relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are a uniform brown dorsally, but are slightly lighter on the ventral surface. The pigment density increases posteriorly and is greatest on the first half of the tail. There is some tendency to a checkerboard dropout of pigment on the anterior ventral surface and near the cloacal region. In many specimens the ventral pigmentation becomes patchy on the individual segments. The chin and anterior ventral region are pale. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The small rostral is visible as a triangle in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by enormous paired shields that cover the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, the nasal, the preocular, and the prefrontal; the vertical posterior suture of these shields lies just anterior to the position of the eye so that the second supralabial (rather than the anterior compound shield) may include the ocular. The large second supralabial (or first postocular one) extends dorsally to narrow contact with the lateral edges of the small triangular frontal. The very large parietals include much of the area occupied in some other species by the postoculars and the temporals and broadly contact the large first postsupralabial, which extends posteriorly dorsal to the second postsupralabial and is much higher than it is long at the postlabial edge. A pair of small triangular occipitals lies medial to the posterior portion of the parietals. The posterior tip of the parietals may keep them from contacting the very small temporals (which lie dorsal to the third postsupralabial). The second (and third) postsupralabials are small and irregular, as are the shields dorsal to them up to the midline. Most of these and the nuchal intercalated dorsal half-annulus cover the posterior portion of the head along the deep nuchal constriction and face posteriorly, indicating that only the anteriorly and dorsally directed shields are enlarged. The dorsal portions of the first three annuli are involved in cephalic coverage. The snout is prognathous and the rostral is far more obvious in ventral than in dorsal view. The lower jaw is not particularly deeply inserted into the bulbous snout, which is almost twice as wide as high. In ventral view, the mental is narrower than the infralabials; however, the area of the latter is greater. The anterior suture of the second infralabial extends anteriorly at an angle from the junction with the malars to the lip. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials swings anteromedially so that the enlarged squarish malars generally lie lateral to the posterior portion of the first and all of the second postgenial rows. The lateral postgenials of the first row on each side lie posterior to the first infralabials and flank a single enlarged medial postgenial shield (specimen CG 3579 has four subequal first postgenials); there are four smaller postgenials in the second row. The postmalars are slightly enlarged. The segments of the gular region are slightly reduced in size and the midventral segments of the seventh annulus show the first indication of fusion of the medial segments. An intercalated dorsal half-annulus lies near the eighth body annulus. There are 228 to 235 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portions of the seventh to eighth discrete dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody an annulus contains 12 1-1½ times as long as wide dorsal segments and 10 ventral ones, the medial ones about 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 21 to 22 caudal annuli before an oval end, which is generally twice or more as long as the last annulus and bears faintly indented sutures only near its anterior edge. An autotomy site is marked at the seventh to eighth postcloacal annulus. It is always well defined and slightly narrowed and more intensely pigmented than the caudal annuli. Two of six specimens have a broken tail. There are either ten or no variably produced precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of the posterior edge of one of the nine to ten narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus (some females show faint pore scars here). This set corresponds to the width of the enlarged midventral segments and precedes the edge of the crescentic precloacal shield. The shield consists of two very wide median plus two pairs of narrower and triangular flanking segments. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of eight to ten segments. The trunk is generally slightly wider than high; however, it becomes rounded and slightly higher than wide just posterior to the cloacal region. The tail is of smaller diameter than the trunk. The caudal tip forms a distinct vertical oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 20th body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately as wide as half of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 40 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and it continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. The ventral sulcus is only indicated by alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 37)
Cynisca haugi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Differentiation between C. haughi and C. bifrontalis is relatively minor (Gans 1987). It involves the lack of a discreet ocular in C. haughi (present in C. bifrontalis), and a caudal autotomy site at the level of the 7th caudal annulus (at the 11th in C. bifrontalis). Cynisca haughi may also have higher body annuli counts (251 in the holotype), although more material is required for confirmation. The holotype of C. bifrontalis has 240 body annuli, whilst in the Toucan-Rabi series they range from only 229 to 231.DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, prefrontal, preocular, and ocular fused, with blind suture entering fused shield from above the level of the eye. Large frontal and parietal discrete; occipital (?) tiny, smaller than flanking segments of second body annulus. First postocular supralabial broadly contacts frontals. A single large temporal lies dorsal to the first postsupralabial. Second body annulus forms complete ring of as many segments as third, includes small occipital and second postsupralabial, and is differentiated only by the more irregular anterior edge. Head bulbous. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental (damaged) wider and slightly shorter than first infralabials in ventral view; malars enlarged, enclosing two rows, the first containing four segments, the second containing four regular segments and a single, small triangular segment. 251 body annuli; 27 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 8 dorsal, 8 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. No precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 7th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 39)DESCRIPTION (Pattern XI): Meristic characters are summarized in table 1. Figures 19 and 7 show the views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the caudal region, figure 11 the segment proportions, as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. The type is faded to a uniform pale brown. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is relatively small, but visible in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by enormous paired shields that cover the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, the nasal, the preocular, and the prefrontal; the vertical posterior suture of these shields with the second supralabial (first postocular supralabial) bisects the position of the eye. There is neither a discrete ocular nor a supraocular. A blind suture extends anteriorly into the compound shield just above the level at which the second supralabial is in broad horizontal contact with the parallel-sided frontal. (The entire anterior region is quite worn; however, application of a surface stain suggests that there may once have been a discrete squarish ocular with the blind suture being its dorsal margin.) The parietal IS also squarish, but slightly narrower than the frontal. Laterally, it is in contact with a parallelogramic temporal and it in turn with the squarish postsupralabial. The dorsal half-annulus of the second body annulus includes the widened and tiny occipitals (?), which are smaller than the flanking segments. Consequently, the enlarged cephalic shields only include the dorsal segments of the first (and part of the second) body annulus. The snout is prognathous and the rostral is far more obvious in ventral than in dorsal view. The lower jaw is inserted into the bulbous snout, which is almost twice as wide as high. In ventral view, the mental is narrower than the enormous infralabials; the area of the latter IS greater and the anterior edges between them are obscured. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials crosses the chin at the level of the second infralabials; medially, this suture swings slightly anteriorly and then reverses. The enlarged malars correspond to two rows of postgenials, rather than a single one. The second infralabials are small and their anterior suture passes anteriorly from the junction with the malars to the lip. Two wide segments, flanked by a narrower one on each side, occupy the first postmental row; the latter elements lie posterior to the first infralabials. The second postgenial row contains five segments (four squarish and one asymmetrically positioned and triangular). The segments of the gular region are slightly reduced in size and the midventral segments of the seventh annulus show the first indication of enlargement of the medial segments. The type has 251 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portions of the first ten discrete dorsal half-annuli are irregular, involving fusions, and some are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody, an annulus contains eight squarish to longer than wide dorsal segments, and eight ventral ones, the medial about twice or slightly more as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 27 caudal annuli before an oval end, which is generally twice or more as long as the last annulus and bears faintly indented sutures only near its anterior edge. An autotomy site is very faintly marked at the seventh (not the ninth, as indicated by Dunger, 1968) postcloacal annulus. The tail of the holotype is intact. The first caudal annulus bears an azygous midventral segment; all other segments are paired. There are no precloacal pores, but eight (or ten) narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus lie in the position of pore-bearing segments. This set corresponds to the width of the enlarged pair of medial ventral segments. The rounded precloacal shield consists of two very wide median plus several narrower flanking segments some of which extend laterally beyond the round portion. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of ten segments. The trunk is generally slightly wider than high; however, it becomes rounded and slightly higher than wide just posterior to the cloacal region. (The specimen is very desiccated and these are estimates.) The caudal tip forms a distinct vertical oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the tenth body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately as wide as half of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 100 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and it continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. There is no ventral sulcus. (Gans 1987: 39)
Cynisca kigomensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A medium-sized member of the genus Cynisca showing major fusion of the head shields, namely fusion of the 1st and 2nd supralabials with the nasal,prefrontal, frontal, and preocular shields. A pair of separate ocular shields, each in contact posteriorly with the upper half of the anterior margin of the posterior (3rd) supralabial and the outer half of the anterior margin of the postfrontal. A pair of postfrontals and a pair of large parietals; a small pair of interparietals of irregular shape and unequal size. Fusion of the 1st and 2nd supralabials; a posterior (3rd) larqe supralabial. Fusion of the 1st and 2nd infralabials; a small posterior (3rd) infralabial. Mental fused to the postmental; the postgenials in two rows,an anterior and a posterior each containing 4 segments. Postgenials flanked by enlarged malar shields. Body annuli 258; lateral annuli 4; caudal annuli 20-21 with an autotomy constriction after the 7th. 8 precloacal pores in the male, none in the female; 6-8 precloacal segments and 8 postcloacal segments surround the cloacal slit. Segments in a midbody annulus 26-28, 14 dorsal and 12-14 ventral (from Dunger 1968).DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal. prefrontal, and preocular fused. No blind suture enters fused shield. Frontal, large parietal, and small triangular occipital discrete. First postocular supralabial in point or narrow contact with the rounded lateral tip of the frontal. Discrete squarish diagonal ocular in anterior corner between these two shields. Parietal includes temporal region, dorsal to the postocular supralabial, the first and the second postsupralabial and two segments of the second body annulus. Snout bulbous, but head not very pointed. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental shorter than first infralabials, narrower in ventral view. Malars enlarged, enclosing posterior half of first and all of second postgenial row of four segments each. 256-258 body annuli; 20 caudal annuli. Midbody segments 13-14 dorsal, 12-14 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 8 or 0 precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 7th to 8th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 41)DESCRIPTION (Pattern XIV): Meristic characters are summarized in table 2. Figures 20 and 8 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region; 6 figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a medium-size species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are a uniform pale brown dorsally, but are slightly lighter on the ventral surface. The pigment density increases posteriorly and is greatest iS on the first half of the tail. Pigment also drops out in an irregular checkerboard pattern ventrally; also the cloacal region is unpigmented. The snout seems to lack pigmentation. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The small rostral is barely visible as a triangle in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by enormous paired shields that cover the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, nasals, preoculars, and prefrontals: the vertical posterior suture of these shields bisects the position of the eye. The small, squarish, diagonally placed ocular inserts into this compound shield anterior to the short contact zone between the postocular supralabial and the frontal. The large second supralabial (or first postocular one) extends dorsally to point contact with the rounded lateral tips of the triangular frontal (which is azygously irregular in AMNH 102425). The very large parietal includes much of the area otherwise occupied by the postocular and the temporals and broadly contacts the large first postsupralabial, which extends posteriorly dorsal to the second body annulus and is much higher than its length along the postlabial edge. A small triangular occipital (azygously irregular in AMNH 102425) lies medial to the posterior portion of the parietal. The second and third postsupralabials are small and irregular, as are the segments dorsal to them up to the midline. Most of these cover the posterior portion of the head and face posteriorly, indicating that only the anteriorly and dorsally directed shields are enlarged. A crescentic intercalated nuchal half-annulus follows. Whereas only one or two body annuli are clearly incorporated in the enlarged head shields, the dorsal portions of the first three annuli are involved in cephalic coverage. The snout is prognathous and the rostral iS far more obvious in ventral than in dorsal view. The lower jaw is not particularly deeply inserted into the bulbous snout, which iS almost twice as wide as high. In ventral view, the mental is narrower than the infralabials, but the area of the latter is greater. The anterior suture of the second infralabial extends at an angle from the junction with the malars to the lip. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials first swings anteromedially and then slightly posteriorly toward the midline; thus, the enlarged pentagonal malars generally lie lateral to the posterior portion of the first and all of the second row of small paired postgenials of four segments each. The lateral postgenials on each side lie posterior to the infralabials and to the posterior portion of the first row of postgenial segments. The postmalars are slightly enlarged. The segments of the gular region are slightly reduced in size and the midventral segments of the seventh annulus show the first indication of fusion of the medial segments. An intercalated dorsal half-annulus lies near the ninth body annulus. There are 256 to 258 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portions of the seventh to eighth discrete dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody an annulus contains 13 to 14 (generally 14) 1½ to 2 times as long as wide dorsal segments and 12 or 14 ventral ones, the medial ones about 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 20 caudal annuli before an oval end, which is generally twice or more as long as the last annulus and bears faintly indented sutures only near its anterior edge. An autotomy site is marked at the seventh to eighth postcloacal annulus. It is always well defined, both tail and autotomy annulus being slightly narrowed and more intensely pigmented. One of two specimens had a broken tail. There are eight or no variably produced precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of the posterior edge of one of the seven to eight narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus. This set corresponds to the width of the enlarged midventral segments and turns around the anterior edge of the crescentic precloacal shield. The shield consists of two very wide median segments, plus a pair of narrower and triangular flanking segments. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of eight to ten segments. The trunk is generally slightly wider than high; however, it becomes rounded and slightly higher than wide just posterior to the cloacal region. The caudal tip forms a distinct vertical oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 20th body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately as wide as half of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 30 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures; at midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. The ventral sulcus is only indicated by alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 41)
Cynisca kraussi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Nasal, preocular, and prefrontal discrete. Ocular discrete (pentagonal, diagonally placed). A small, median azygous shield in 9 of the 39 specimens. Two preocular and one postocular supralabials. Frontals small, triangular. Occipital relatively large, clearly derived from second body annulus. Very large postocular supralabial in narrow contact with postocular (-parietal) that has broad contact with the midline, with the occipital, and with a very large first postsupralabial that appears to have fused with the temporal. Second postsupralabial small, forming part of second body annulus (that more dorsally contributes the occipitals). Snout generally pointed, preocular region swollen. 3 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental flanked by enormous first infralabials; its posterior tip separated into a postmental. One row of 2-4 small postgenials anterior to the enlarged malars and a second row of 4 to 7 between them. 208-226 body annuli; 16-19 caudal annuli. Most specimens have a hump in the tail leading to a spatulate depressed distal tip covered dorsally by a rosette of segments (and which is underlain by a faint terminal ossification). Midbody segments, 14-20 dorsal, 12-16 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 8 large round precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 6th to 7th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 43) DESCRIPTION (Patterns I/I): The meristic characters are summarized in table 4. Figures 23 and 8 show the views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region, figure 21 the checkerboard coloration of the ventral surface, figure 22 details of the caudal rosette; figure 6 gives the body proportions and 39 provides radiographs of the caudal region in two specimens. This is a very small, slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are light brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeds just at the lateral sulci. However, both the dorsal and the ventral surfaces are pigmented; this pigmentation fades ventrally. Darker specimens show an erratic, light checkerboard arrangement of pigmented segments on the ventral surface (fig. 21); this IS not apparent in lighter specimens. The intersegmental sutures of the dorsal surface are faintly lightened. The dorsal pigmentation may be mottled. The dorsal surfaces of the top of the head (particularly the frontals) of the posterior quarter of the trunk and of the caudal region are somewhat darker than those of the anterior trunk. The pigmentation of the autotomy annulus does not differ dorsally, but is denser ventrally. The caudal rosette is colored a very dark leaden gray (rather than brown) and even the ventral portion of the tail is darkened. The autotomy annulus is darkened both dorsally and ventrally. The anterior head shields show no major fusions. The rostral is visible in dorsal view as a small triangle. Posteriorly, it is followed on each side by a large nasal that sends a short wing to meet the preocular. The first preocular supralabial is longer than the second. The preocular contacts both these supralabials, the ocular, the prefrontal, and the nasal. The preocular of CAS 127398 is fused to the prefrontal and ocular on the left side. The diagonally placed ocular is longer than wide; the large eye lies just ventral to its center, and there is no supraocular. The prefrontals appear roughly rectangular in dorsal view, cover much of the dorsal surface of the snout anterior to the level of the eyes, and may include between them a small (sometimes absent) quadratic azygous shield. The convex posterior edge of this shield interdigitates between the anterior edges of the relatively small frontal shields. The anterior frontal edge extends anteriorly to the lateral tips of the azygous shield; the edge then continues posterolaterally to reach point contact with the dorsal tip of the oculars, then gradually narrows toward the midline, which it reaches at a level anterior to the angulus oris. The parietals are in variable contact along the midline, the contact often being longer than either that of the frontal or the occipital. It occupies the area otherwise filled by the postocular and consequently has narrow contact with the third supralabial and wide contact with the enormous postsupralabial, which widens dorsally. The second body annulus swings slightly anteriorly in the temporal region and contains three small segments dorsal to the second postsupralabial; these are followed in turn by a large occipital flanking the midline. The latter is almost as large as the frontal; however, it seems as if the enlarged head shields only incorporate the dorsal segments of the first two body annuli. The middorsal segments of the third dorsal halfannulus may be enlarged. The nuchal region shows some irregularity. The third body annulus tends to be very narrow laterally just posterior to the postsupralabials and the fourth body annulus may be widened. There are no intercalated dorsal half-annuli. In general, the fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first two body annuli. The snout is markedly prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The large mental iS narrower posteriorly than anteriorly and is significantly shorter than the flanking enormous and considerably longer first infralabials. The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend at an angle from the malar junction to the lip. The anteriormost space between the first infralabials is occupied by a small postmental. The malars are enlarged. Anterior and medial to them lies a row of two to four postgenials, only the medial pair of which lies directly posterior to the postmental; a second row of five to seven postgenials follows between the malars. The ventral segments of the first five body annuli are reduced in size. Some specimens show fusion or other irregularities in the region of the 10th to 12th ventral annuli before the fully widened midventral segments appear. There are 211 to 226 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to sixth discrete half-annuli may be narrowed and folded. At midbody an annulus contains 14 to 20 twice as long as wide dorsal segments and 12 to 16 (generally 12 to 14) ventral ones; the medial segments are 1¼4 times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 16 to 20 caudal annuli, the last 3 to 5 much narrower dorsally than ventrally, and the last one visible in ventral view showing an array of narrow elongated segments that completely occupies the caudal tip. The segments occupying the flattened dorsoposterior aspect of the tail are tightly joined so that the interannular sutures are no wider than the intersegmental ones. They form a series of concentric rings with the center filled with somewhat larger segments. In some specimens these segments are faintly produced into cones. However, in the largest specimens the caudal tip appears to be worn smooth. A narrowed and markedly pigmented autotomy site occurs on the sixth to seventh postcloacal position. (Eight of the 39 specimens show autotomy.) There are eight large round precloacal pores, each inserted into the center of the posterior edge of one of the eight segments of the precloacal annulus, those of the males bearing projecting cores. The pore-bearing row corresponds to the full width of the ventral region, as well as to that of the precloacal shield. The latter has a central posteriorly curved portion, that is covered by four parallel-sided segments, the median ones the largest, followed laterally by a gradually diminishing section of two segments. The postcloacal edge is formed of 10 to 12 segments. The snout is markedly pointed, more in dorsal than in lateral view. At the level of the nostrils it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The snout is vertically swollen anterior to the level of the eyes. The temporal region is hardly wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli. The trunk is rounded anteriorly and variably compressed dorsoventrally thereafter onto the base of the tail. After the autotomy level it suddenly becomes higher than wide to form a dorsal hump, shortly posterior to which the spatulate distal section is compressed into a horizontal wedge. The lateral sulci start at the 20th to 50th body annulus, being indicated anteriorly only by alignment of sutures; at midbody an annulus is more than one-half the width of an adjacent segment and contains large triangular segments. The dorsal sulcus is marked from near the 70th annulus and is narrower than the lateral ones. It continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail, though the intercalated segments drop out at the level of the cloaca. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 43)
Cynisca leonina	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, preocular, and prefrontal fused, with a blind suture entering fused shield from anterior corner of ocular. Ocular discrete (quadratic, diagonally placed). A small median azygous shield. Frontal and parietal fused (relatively small). Occipital distinct. Enormous first postocular supralabial contacts frontal-parietal. Large temporal lies dorsal to first and second postsupralabials. Snout generally pointed. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental and first infralabials enormous. No true postmental, rather an enlarged median segment in the first postgenial row followed by two small segments in a second row, both TOWS flanked by elongate segments between the enlarged malars. 233-243 body annuli; 18-19 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 14 dorsal, 10 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 7-8 round precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 6th to 7th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 46)DESCRIPTION (Pattern VI): The meristic characters are summarized in table 7. Figures 24 and 8 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are a uniform light brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeds within one or two segments just above the lateral sulci. The intersegmental sutures of the dorsal surface are lightened. A few lighter patches appear in the anterolateral region and it is uncertain whether or not these represent artifacts of preservation. The anterior fused shield as well as the supralabials are always lighter colored. In contrast, the median azygous shield, the oculars, and the frontal-parietals (and sometimes the occipitals), as well as irregular parts of adjacent shields, are a medium brown, much darker than any other part of the trunk. This pigmentation gives the appearance of a forked dark patch on the head. The dorsal surface of the caudal region IS somewhat darker than that of the trunk and even the ventral portion of the tail is darkened. The cloacal shields may be lighter. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is barely visible in dorsal view. Posteriorly, it is followed on each side by a large shield that includes the preocular supralabials, the nasal, and the prefrontal. The diagonally placed oculars are wider than long. A blind suture extends from its anterior corner into the fused shield. A triangular azygous shield lies on the midline. Its anterior tip inserts between the posterior portion of the anterior fused shield; laterally, it has point contact with the oculars and the transverse posterior edge contacts the fused, relatively small frontal (-parietal) shields. The second supralabial (or first postocular one) is longest at the level of the eye; it extends dorsally to contact the midlateral portion of the frontalparietal shield. The frontal appears to be fused to the parietal, but the compound shield is relatively small and some specimens (MG 722.94b; MHNP 1895.481) show unilateral (or bilateral in MHNP 1897-319) point or broader contact of the enormous temporal to the midline. A triangular pair of occipitals (irregular in MG 722.94b) extends anteriorly from the third body annulus almost to the level of the angulus oris. The first postsupralabial is twice as high as long; the second is squarish and is followed dorsally by a second subequal shield which lies below the enormous temporal-parietal. The temporal covers the side of the head anterior to the first dorsal half-annulus and posterior to the first postocular supralabial. In general, the fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first two body annuli. The snout is slightly prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The large mental is narrower posteriorly than anteriorly and is flanked completely by the enormous first infralabials. The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend anteriorly from the junction with the malars to the lip. The large and rectangular malars are twice as wide as long. A median enlarged postmental is followed posteriorly by two postgenials; all three are flanked by two elongate segments medial to the first infralabials and malars; thus a superficial count would give three postgenials of the first row and four postgenials in the second row. In most specimens, the flanking segments are subdivided so that there are two discrete rows of postgenials. The ventral segments of the first through sixth body annuli are reduced in size; the seventh and eighth swing anteriorly near the midventral line; neither more anterior nor more posterior annuli show this pattern. Some specimens show fusion or other irregularity of ventral annuli in this region. There are 233 to 243 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to sixth discrete dorsal half-annuli may be narrowed and folded. At midbody an annulus contains 14, from twice as long as wide to squarish, dorsal segments and ten ventral ones, the medial ones 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to three lateral annuli. The tail bears 18 or 19 caudal annuli before a conically oval cap that is more than twice as long as the next annulus and generally includes indications of segmental subdivisions all around the base, but not on the distal tip. A narrowed, but not especially pigmented autotomy site occurs on the sixth to seventh postcloacal position. (None of the specimens shows autotomy.) There are seven to eight variably produced round precloacal pores, each inserted near the posterior edge of one of the segments of the precloacal annulus; those of males bear projecting cores. (The holotype is aberrant in that only three of the eight precloacal segments bear any pores, but these are very well developed.) The pore-bearing row corresponds to the width of the paired ventral segments and to the four medial segments of the six subequal ones covering the crescentic precloacal shield. The postcloacal edge is formed of six to eight segments. The snout is markedly pointed, both in dorsal and in lateral view. At the level of the nostrils, it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The temporal region is wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli. The preocular portion of the snout is slightly swollen. The trunk is variably compressed dorsoventrally until the base of the tail where the cross section changes to a vertical oval. The lateral sulci start at the 40th body annulus, indicated anteriorly only by alignment of sutures; at midbody an annulus is less than half the width of an adjacent segment and contains some tiny triangular segments. The dorsal sulcus begins at the same level and is of similar proportions. It continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail, though the intercalated segments drop out at the level of the cloaca. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 46)
Cynisca leucura	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (genus): Generally small and slender species with the anterior trunk dorsoventrally compressed, rounded at midbody, and vertically ovate posterior to the cloacal region (normally at or posterior to autotomy site). Headroundedor variablypointed,usually horizontallyoval.Rostralalwaysdiscrete,but (except for C. williamsi in which in broad contact with the prefrontals), small, and visible only as a tiny triangle in dorsal view. All forms with a band of enlarged (and generally paired) dorsal segments extending posteriorly from the snout to incorporate portions of the second or third body annulus. All specimens with one or even two postsupralabials and a zone of variously fused and enlarged segments in the "postocular" region dorsal to these. A lateral groove, filled with small, intercalated triangular segments, between the first third to half of the body and vent. Dorsal sulcus variably expressed; ventral sulcus, if present, indicated only by alignment of sutures. Median ventral segments generally enlarged. In some species, fused into an azygous medial segmental shield. Males of all species with precloacal pores; females of some species without pores or even secretion cores. All species (but C. williamsi) with a caudal autotomy constriction. Distal tip of original tail usually regularly segmented, occasionally showing modifications, such as a dorsal hump or inclined array of segments. (Gans 1987: 22)Diagnosis: Two preocular supralabials, preocular and ocular discrete. Nasal and prefrontal fused except for blind suture reaching anteriorly from corner of preocular. Median azygous shield. (Sometimes a pair of segments posterior to the azygous shield on the midline, anterior to the frontals.) Frontals, parietals, and occipitals distinct. Postocular supralabial kept from contact with frontal by large postocular. Two or more medium-size temporals dorsal to first (and second) postsupralabials. Snout generally pointed. 3 supralabials and 2 infralabials. First infralabials much wider and slightly longer than mental plus postmental (which are fused in 12% of specimens). Two rows of postgenials (2-6, 4-11; rarely three rows), each between enlarged malars. 203-252 body annuli; 20-30 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 12-23 dorsal, 8-16 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 0, 6-13 round precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 5th to 9th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 48)DESCRIPTION (Pattern III): This widely ranging species shows substantial geographic variation. The meristic characters are summarized in tables 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Figures 25 and 8 show the views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions, as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 14 lateral view of tail and caudal region, figure 26 a lateral view of the head with the mouth open; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a large species of Cynisca. Specimens are a uniform dark bluish-brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeds by general fading within one or two segments just ventral to the lateral sulci (though a very few specimens, such as RMNH 18672, show a checkerboard drop out of pigment) and the midventral segments may be very light. However, even the ventral surface of most specimens is pigmented, which is particularly obvious on the ventral surface of the tail. All or part of the chin tends to be unpigmented as may be the first supralabial; some specimens show a lightened partial neck band near the second and third annuli. In many specimens one sees the collagen fibers of the extracolumellar attachment as a light area deep to the large infralabials. Some precloacal segments may be colorless and there may be a narrow nonpigmented midventral streak down the center of the tail. Pigmentation of segments tends to be uniform, except that the anterior half of each segment is darker (which is more obvious on the ventral surface). The dorsal surfaces of the head and caudal region are slightly darker than the trunk; the dorsal caudal cap is darkest. One or two autotomy annuli may be markedly darkened. The anterior head shields show fusions only in the loss of the anterior sutures between nasals and prefrontals; however, there is notable variation in segmental proportions and marked asymmetry. The rostral is visible as a small triangle in dorsal view. Posteriorly, it is followed on each side by a very large nasal-prefrontal, though a horizontal blind suture extends into this shield from the anterior tip of the preocular. A pentagonal azygous shield of variable size lies along the midline between the fused nasal-prefrontal shields. (In a few specimens from Achimota the azygous shows a partial midline split from the posterior edge. The shield is subdivided into three smaller shields, effectively intercalating an additional pair of "prefrontals" back of the azygous that are in contact with the supraoculars, in CG 4736 and 4763.) Laterally, this shield is excluded from contact with the ocular by the quadrangular supraocular (azygously fused to the ocular in CG 3998, to the frontal and postocular in CG 4746), which keeps the prefrontal from contacting the frontal. The anterior edge of each frontal extends most anteriorly at the line where the azygous median shield contacts the supraoculars and slopes posteriorly from here to contact the oculars and postoculars along which it gradually narrows to asymmetrical contact with the parietals. The latter widen posteriorly along the postocular and narrow along contact with a temporal to join a pair of small occipitals, that derive from the median segments of the third body annulus, or of an intercalated dorsal half-annulus (lying between body annuli two and three). There are two preocular supralabials; the second is larger and kept from contact with the prefrontal by the rectangular preocular. The small polygonal ocular is diagonally placed with the large eye visible in its center. The third supralabial is enormous and extends dorsally along the posteroventral side of the ocular to contact the ventral edge of the large postocular. A slightly enlarged first postsupralabial and a smaller second one form the base of the temporal region. A large temporal shield lies dorsal to the first postsupralabial and two small ones dorsal to the second. An intercalated dorsal half-annulus follows after the first dorsal half-annulus corresponding to body annulus four. The zone of the first two postsupralabials extends upward to form the temporal region, the occipitals being part of the second (an intercalated half-annulus) or the third dorsal half-annulus. The zone of enlargment corresponds to the dorsal portions of two to three body annuli. However, the temporal and parietal-occipital regions of this species are highly variable, and show very irregular segmentation with differences common within samples and major asymmetries in most specimens. The snout is slightly prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The mental is narrower posteriorly than anteriorly; it is generally followed by an elongate postmental (see section on Geographic Variation) and both are flanked completely by the enormous first infralabials. The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend anteriorly from the malar junction to the lip. The enlarged trapezoidal malars enclose the posterior portion of the first and all of the second postgenial row, the first containing 2 to 6 segments and the latter 4 to 11; often the segments medial to the malars are elongate and undivided, whereas a few specimens show additional subdivision leading to a pattern resembling three postgenial rows. The lateral postgenials lie posterior to the first infralabials. The ventral segments of the first Six to seven body annuli are reduced in size, by the 10th annulus the medial ones are squarish and by the 20th they are twice as wide as long. There are 203 to 252 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to eighth anteriormost annuli may be narrowed and folded and a crescentic dorsal half-annulus lies intercalated between body annuli three and four (see above), whereas there tends to be an intercalated or spiral annulus within the first ten body annuli and some segmental irregularity in the cloacal region. At midbody an annulus contains 12 to 23 dorsal segments, the medial ones twice as long as wide, whereas the medial segments of the 8 to 16 ventral ones are 2-2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to four (generally three to four) lateral annuli with asymmetries common. The tail bears 20 to 30 caudal annuli before a conically oval cap that is longer than the next annulus and generally includes indications of segmental subdivisions around the base, but not on the distal tip. A narrowed, often more densely pigmented, autotomy site occurs on the fifth to ninth postcloacal position. There are 6 to 13 (generally 8 to 11) large round precloacal pores (in a continuous or medially interrupted row) on the posterior edge of the precloacal segments (a single specimen from Bobo Dioulasso lacks pores); projecting cores are each inserted into the center of one of the small segments lying anterior to the precloacal shield. The pore-bearing row corresponds to the width of the six midventral segments and exceeds the width of the four enlarged medial segments of the eight to ten covering the crescentic precloacal shield. The medial pair of segments tends to be longer than the more lateral ones and may extend into the pore-bearing row, separating it by the insertion of a triangular wedge. The postcloacal edge is formed of 7 to 11 (generally 8 to 10) segments. The snout is more pointed in lateral than in dorsal view. At the level of the nostrils it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The temporal region may be slightly wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli and the back of the head may be slightly constricted. The trunk is rounded anteriorly and variably compressed dorsoventrally thereafter until the base of the tail, where the cross section changes to a vertical oval. The lateral sulci start near the 20th body annulus and extend just beyond the level of the cloaca. Anteriorly, they are indicated only by alignment of sutures; at midbody, they contain multiple, regular intercalated segments. The middorsal sulcus begins near the 10th annulus, but only becomes significantly widened near the 60th. It is narrower than the lateral ones and only a tiny triangular segment on the posterior half of each annulus. It continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail, though the intercalated segments drop out at the level of the cloaca. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 48)
Cynisca liberiensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal and prefrontal fused, with a blind suture entering fused shield from anterior corner of ocular. Ocular discrete (quadratic, diagonally placed). Frontal and parietal fused (relatively small). One or two pairs of distinct occipitals. Enormous first postocular supralabial in broad contact with frontal-parietal. Large temporal lies dorsal to large first and smaller second postsupralabials. Snout generally pointed. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental and first infralabials enormous. 2 rows of up to 4 postgenials each between enlarged malars. 217-262 body annuli; 21-24 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 12-16 dorsal, 8-10 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 6 or 8 round precloacal pores in males, none in females. Autotomy site at the 6th to 9th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 53)DESCRIPTION (Pattern XII): The meristic characters are summarized in table 6. Figures 27 and 9 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 15 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body 6 proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are a uniform brown dorsally, some specimens showing mottling of the dorsal segments, and a lighter pigmentation on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeds within one or two segments just above the lateral sulci. The dorsal surface of the caudal region is somewhat darker than that of the trunk and even the ventral portion of the tail is darkened. The cloacal shields may be lighter and some parts of the ventral region may show the pigment dropping out by segments (checkerboard pattern). The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is barely visible in dorsal view. Posteriorly, it is followed on each side by a large shield that includes the preocular supralabials, the nasal, and the prefrontal. The diagonally placed oculars are wider than long (but the eye of preserved specimens often appears to be bisected by their posterior suture). A blind suture extends from its anterior corner into the fused shield. The suture between the large shield and frontals forms an anteriorly pointing, shallow V on the head. The frontal-parietal shields are relatively large. One of two pairs of rectangular occipitals extends anteriorly to the level of the midregion of the first postsupralabial. The second supralabial (or first postocular one) is longest at the level of the eye; it extends dorsally from the lip to contact the widest portion of the frontal-parietal shield. The first postsupralabial is twice as high as long; the second is squarish and followed dorsally by a second subequal one, which lies below the large temporal. The temporal covers the side of the head anterior to the first dorsal half-annulus and posterior to the first postocular supralabial. In general, the fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first two body annuli. The snout is slightly prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The large mental is narrower posteriorly than anteriorly and flanked completely by the enormous first infralabials. The first postgenials may be fused or discrete (Brongersma, 1935). The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend from the junction with the malars anteriorly to the lip. The enlarged and rectangular malars are of variable proportions. There are two to four small postgenials in the first (IRSNB 2005 and USNM 24294 show an enlarged median one in the first) row and four to six in the second one. The ventral segments of the first six body annuli are reduced in size; the seventh and eighth swing anteriorly near the midventral line; neither more anterior nor more posterior annuli show this pattern. Some specimens show fusion or other irregularity of ventral annuli in this region. There are 217-262 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to the sixth discrete dorsal half-annuli may be narrowed and folded. At midbody an annulus contains 12 to 16 dorsal segments (generally 14), from twice as long as wide to squarish, and 8 or 10 ventral ones, the medial segments 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 21 to 24 caudal annuli before a conically oval cap occurs that is more than twice as long as the next annulus and includes faint segmental impressions along the base, but not on the distal tip. A narrowed, but relatively poorly defined autotomy site occurs on the sixth to ninth postcloacal position. (Four of 19 specimens have broken tails.) There are six to eight variably produced round cored precloacal pores in the males; the females have none. The pore-bearing row corresponds to the width of the paired ventral segments and to the two to four enlarged medial segments of the six covering the crescentic precloacal shield. The postcloacal edge is formed of six to eight segments. The snout is markedly pointed, both in dorsal and in lateral view. At the level of the nostrils it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The temporal region is wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli. The trunk is variably compressed dorsoventrally to the base of the tail where the cross section changes to a vertical oval. The lateral sulci start between the 10th and 20th body annulus and are indicated anteriorly only by alignment of sutures; at midbody an annulus is less than half the width of an adjacent segment and contains some tiny triangular segments. The dorsal sulcus begins at the 50th to 60th body annulus and is of similar proportions. It continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail, though the intercalated segments drop out at the level of the cloaca. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 53)
Cynisca muelleri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: First preocular supralabial, nasal, preocular, and prefrontal fused, with a blind suture entering fused shield from anterior corner of distinct second preocular supralabial. Ocular discrete, pentagonal, diagonally placed. A small median azygous shield. Frontals relatively small. Parietal either fused with frontal or with enormous temporal. Two pairs of small distinct occipitals. Very large first postocular supralabial kept from contact with frontal by enormous postocular (-temporal) that may have azygous contact with the midline and both first and second dorsal half-annulus. 1 or 2 temporals lie dorsal to first and second postsupralabials. 3 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Snout generally pointed, preocular region swollen. Mental flanked by enormous first infralabials. One row of 4 or 5 small postgenials anterior to and a second row of 4-6 postgenials between enlarged malars. 220-237 body annuli; 22-26 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 11-15 dorsal, 10-13 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 10-12 round precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 6th to 8th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 55) DESCRIPTION (Pattern V): The meristic characters are summarized in table 4. Figures 28 and 9 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 11 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are a uniform light brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeds within one or two segments just above the lateral sulci. The intersegmental sutures of the dorsal surface are lightened. The dorsal pigmentation is mottled and emphasizes the anterior centers of dorsal segments. The dorsal surfaces of the posterior quarter of the trunk and the caudal region are somewhat darker than those of the anterior trunk and even the ventral portion of the tail is darkened. The cloacal shields may be lighter. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is faintly visible in dorsal view. Posteriorly, it is followed on each side by a large shield that includes the first preocular supralabial, the nasal, the preocular, and the prefrontal. The diagonally placed ocular is wider than long. A blind suture extends from the anterior corner of the second preocular supralabial into the fused shield. A quadrangular azygous shield lies on the midline. Its anterior tip inserts between the prefrontal portion of the fused shield and its convex posterior edge between the fused, relatively narrow frontal (-parietal) shields. The anterior frontal edge flares sharply from the midline to reach the oculars and then gradually narrows to asymmetrical contact with the irregularly shaped occipitals, which widen posteriorly to meet the first dorsal half-annulus. Their anterior tips just reach the level of the middle of the first postsupralabials. The large first postocular supralabial extends dorsally to contact the anteroventral portion of the postocular (-parietal) shield. The frontals appear to be fused to the parietal, but the shield is relatively small and some specimens show unilateral or bilateral point or broader contact of the enormous postocular to the midline, as well as to the first and second (by partial fusion with shields of the first) dorsal half-annuli. The first postsupralabial is twice as long as high and the second is significantly smaller and squarish; both are followed dorsally by a medium-size temporal. The posterior aspect of the enormous postocular (-parietal) that covers the side of the head anterior to the dorsal half-annuli is irregular. Its posterior portion may be divided off (asymmetrically) as another temporal, or show variable fusion with segments of the first annulus. Partly subdivided shields and blind sutures are common. The annular arrangement is both irregular and asymmetrical and there seem to be three dorsal halfannuli involved in the formation of the region of enlarged shields. The snout is slightly prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The large mental is slightly narrower posteriorly than anteriorly and flanked completely by the enormous longer first infralabials. The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend at a slight angle from the junction with the malar to the lip. A row of four to five postgenials (only the medial two lying posterior to the mental) lies anterior and medial to the malars; a second row of postgenials contains four to Six segments and lies lateral to the malars. The ventral segments of the first five body annuli are reduced in size. Some specimens show fusion or other irregularity of ventral annuli in the region of 10 to 12 before the fully widened midventral segments appear. There are 220 to 237 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to sixth discrete dorsal half-annuli may be narrowed and folded and preceded by one crescentic dorsal half-annulus. At midbody an annulus contains 11 to 15, twice as long as wide, dorsal segments and 10 to 13 ventral ones; the medial segments are 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to five lateral annuli. The tail bears 22 to 26 caudal annuli before a conically oval cap. The last annulus is markedly shortened and the unsegmented cap only slightly longer than an anterior caudal annulus. A narrowed, but not especially pigmented autotomy site occurs at the sixth to eighth postcloacal position. (Two of the 17 specimens show autotomy.) There are 10 to 12 variably produced round precloacal pores, each inserted in the posterior edge of 1 of the 12 segments of the precloacal annulus; those of males bear projecting cores. The pore-bearing row corresponds to the width of the two to four medial ventral segments and to the full width of the flared crescentic precloacal shield, which is covered by six subequal plus two smaller lateral segments. The postcloacal edge is formed of six to eight segments. The snout is markedly pointed, more in dorsal than in lateral view. At the level of the nostrils it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The temporal region is wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli. The trunk is rounded anteriorly and variably compressed dorsoventrally thereafter until the base of the tail where the cross section changes to faintly oval vertically. The lateral sulci start at the 20th body annulus, being indicated anteriorly only by alignment of sutures; at midbody an annulus is only a fraction of the width of an adjacent segment and contains some tiny triangular segments. The dorsal sulcus is marked near the 70th annulus and is of similar proportions. It continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail, though the intercalated segments drop out at the level of the cloaca. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 55)
Cynisca nigeriensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original Diagnosis: A medium sized species of the genus Cynisca showing major fusions of the head shields, namely fusion of the 1st and 2nd supralabials with the nasal,prefrontal, frontal, preocular, and ocular shields. A pair of large elongate postfrontals, together forming the shape of an armorial shield, the postfrontals being sometimes of irregular shape and size. A pair of medium-sized parietals and usually a pair of interparietals, irregular in shape and size, sometimes absent on one or both sides. Fusion of the 1st and 2nd supralabials; a large posterior (3rd) supralabial. Fusion of the 1st and 2nd infralabials; a small posterior (3rd) infralabial. Mental fused to the postmental; the postgenials (chin shields) in two rows, anterior and posterior, containing 4+4 segments but sometimes 2+4 or 3+4. Post-genials flanked by symmetrical enlarged malar shields. Body annuli 225-243; lateral annuli 2-4; caudal annuli 20-22 with an autotomy constriction after the 5th, 6th or 7th caudal annulus. Ten precloacal pores in the male; none in the female; 6-7 precloacal and 5-1o postcloacal segments. Segments in a mid-body annulus number 18-20, 10 dorsal and 8-10 ventral (from Dunger 1968).DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, prefrontal, preocular, and ocular fused. No blind suture enters fused shield. Frontal and parietal discrete; occipital discrete in most specimens (may keep parietals from contacting midline). First postocular supralabial broadly contacts lateral side of frontal. Parietal includes temporal region dorsal to the first and second postsupralabial and displaces the laterodorsal temporal segments of the third (occipital) annulus. Snout bulbous. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental shorter than first infralabials, anteriorly as wide as larger first infralabials in ventral view; malars enlarged, enclosing posterior half of first and all of second postgenial rows (the first row containing 2 to 4 segments, the second contains 4 to 5). 225-242 body annuli; caudal annuli 20-22. Midbody segments, 8-10 dorsal, 7-9 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 10 or 0 precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 5th to 7th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 57)DESCRIPTION (Pattern IX): The meristic characters are summarized in table 2. Figures 29 and 9 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 12 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 15 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are colored a uniform brown dorsally, but are slightly lighter on the ventral surface. The pigment density increases posteriorly and is greatest on the first half of the tail. There is some tendency to checkerboard dropout of pigment in the cloacal region; however, the ventral pigmentation also becomes patchy on individual segments. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The small rostral is barely visible as a triangle in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by enormous paired shields that cover the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, nasals, oculars, preoculars, and prefrontals; the vertical posterior suture of these shields appears to bisect the position of the eye in one specimen, in which the integument appeared translucent. The large second supralabial (or first postocular one) extends dorsally to wide contact with the lateral edges of the trapezoidal frontal and posterodorsally with the large parietal. The latter extends laterally to contact the first postsupralabial, which in turn extends posterodorsally to contact the third body annulus and is much higher than its length along the postlabial edge. The posterior parietal edge contacts the intercalated dorsal half-annulus posterior to the third body annulus. A small triangular occipital lies medial to the posterior portion of the parietal; the frontal and the occipital may restrict or eliminate contact of the parietal with the midline. The occipitals are azygously irregular. Three of the specimens lack occipitals (have them fused with the parietals); in two others, there is an occipital on one side only. The second and third postsupralabials are small and irregular, as are the segments dorsal to the third, up to the midline. Most of these and the intercalated dorsal half-annulus cover the posterior portion of the head and face posteriorly along the deep nuchal constriction, indicating that only the anteriorly and dorsally directed shields are enlarged. The dorsal portions of the first three annuli are involved in cephalic coverage. The snout is prognathous and the rostral is far more obvious in ventral than in dorsal view. The lower jaw is not particularly deeply inserted into the bulbous snout which is almost twice as wide as high. In ventral view, the mental is narrower than the first infralabial, and the area of the latter is greater. The anterior suture of the second infralabial extends anteriorly at an angle from the junction with the malars to the lip. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials swings anteromedially so that the enlarged pentagonal malars generally lie lateral to the posterior portion of the first and all of the second row of small paired postgenials. Each postgenial row contains four (rarely fewer than three in the first and rarely five in the second) segments. The lateral postgenials on each side lie posterior to the infralabials, as do the lateral portions of the medial postgenial. The postmalars are slightly enlarged. The segments of the gular region are slightly reduced in size and the midventral segments of the seventh annulus show the first indication of widening of the medial segments. An intercalated dorsal half-annulus lies near the eighth annulus. There are 225 to 242 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portions of the seventh to eighth discrete dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody, an annulus contains eight to ten (generally ten) dorsal segments 1½-2 times as wide and seven or nine (generally eight) ventral segments, the medial ones about 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three to four lateral annuli. The narrowed tail bears 20 to 22 caudal annuli before a conically oval end, which is generally twice or more as long as the last annulus and bears faintly indented sutures near its anterior edge. An autotomy site is marked at the fifth to seventh postcloacal annulus. It is always well defined, both tail and autotomy annulus being slightly narrowed and more intensely pigmented. Four of 15 specimens have a broken tail. There are either ten or no variably produced precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of the posterior edge of one of the ten narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus (only nine in AMNH 102413). This set corresponds to the width of the enlarged midventral segments and precedes the edge of the bow-shaped precloacal shield. The shield consists of four very wide median segments plus a pair of narrower and shorter flanking segments. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of eight to ten segments. The trunk is generally slightly wider than high; however, it becomes rounded and slightly higher than wide just posterior to the cloacal region. The tail is of smaller diameter than the trunk. The caudal tip forms a distinct vertical oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 20th body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately as wide as half of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 60 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and it continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. The ventral sulcus is only indicated by alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 57)
Cynisca oligopholis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: Boulenger 1906: 201DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal and prefrontal fused, with a blind suture entering the fused shield from the anterior corner of ocular. Oculars discrete (large and rectangular, diagonally placed). A small median azygous shield contacts the oculars. Frontalparietal-occipitals fused into narrow median shields. First postocular supralabial contacts frontal shield. Enormous temporal extends posterodorsally from the second supralabial to fused shields. Head bulbous. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental and first infralabials enormous. Postgenials only slightly enlarged. Malars enlarged, but most posterior chin segments subequal. 224-240 body annuli; 23-25 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 10 dorsal, 8 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 8-11 precloacal pores. Autotomy site lies at 10th to 13th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 59)DESCRIPTION (Pattern VII): Meristic characters are summarized in table 7. Figures 30 and 9 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 12 the segment proportions as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 15 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are uniformly pale brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading is gradual and starts just above the level of the lateral sulcus. The dorsal pigmentation extends anteriorly onto the large head shields, though the tip of the snout and the chin appear lighter colored. The pigment density is greatest on the neck and dorsal surface of the tail. The pale ventral color extends from the chin across the anterior 15 percent of the trunk and the ventral surface becomes darker posteriorly. The cloacal shield and immediate precloacal rows may also be unpigmented. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is not visible in dorsal view. The anteriormost portion of the head is covered on each side by a large shield that includes the region otherwise occupied by the preocular supralabials, the nasal, and the prefrontal. The diagonally placed ocular is semirectangular, much wider than long and a small blind suture extends anteriorly from its anterior corner. The triangular, azygous median shield contacts the anterior fused shields along the midline, the oculars laterally, and the medial portions of the anterior edge of the fused frontal-parietal-occipital shields posteriorly. The second supralabial (or first postocular one) is shorter ventrally than dorsally, but extends dorsally to broad contact with the frontal-parietal-occipital shield that forms a narrow strip from the azygous shield to the anterior edge of the first dorsal half-annulus (or third body annulus). Posterior to the second supralabial lies the enormous temporal shield, which occupies the position of the first postsupralabial and then extends dorsally and posteriorly around the second one to provide a single shield lateral to the frontal-parietaloccipital shield, anterior to the second postsupralabial segment and the irregular first dorsal half-annulus. In general, the fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first two body annuli. The snout is slightly prognathous and the small rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The large mental is slightly narrower posteriorly than anteriorly; its sides are entirely flanked by the enormous first infralabials. The anterior suture of the second infralabial extends at an angle from the junction with the malars to the lip. The small second infralabials medially contact the slightly enlarged malars; the left malar flanks only the second postgenial row, whereas the right malar flanks both rows. The two rows consist of variably arranged postgenial segments that extend laterally beyond the limits of the mental. The segments of the first four annuli in the gular region are slightly smaller than more posterior segments and there may be irregular fusion of annuli here. There are 224 to 240 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing pre-cloacal row. The dorsal portions of the seventh to eighth discrete dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody an annulus contains ten dorsal segments (always longer than wide) and eight ventral segments, the medial ones each 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to three lateral annuli. The tail bears 23 to 25 caudal annuli before an oval end, which is generally two or more times as long as the next anterior annulus and bears faintly indented sutures only near its anterior edge. A slightly narrowed, but not differentially pigmented autotomy annulus is faintly visible between the 10th to 1 3th postcloacal position (almost 40% of the available specimens show broken tails). There are eight to ten variably produced, round precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of the posterior edge of the narrow median segments of the precloacal annulus. This set and the cloacal slit are each narrower than the paired median segments of the more anterior body annuli. The crescentic precloacal shield is covered by four large segments that are flanked by two smaller triangular segments. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of eight to ten segments. The head is slightly dorsoventrally compressed. The trunk is generally rounded down to the midbody region where it becomes slightly flattened dorsoventrally. The transition from horizontal to vertical compression occurs near the level of the autotomy annulus and the caudal tip is vertically oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 14th body annulus. At midbody they are filled with small triangular segments and are approximately as wide as a quarter of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 50 or so body annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail until the autotomy annulus. The ventral sulcus is only indicated by an alignment of intersegmental sutures. (Gans 1987: 59)
Cynisca rouxae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Two preocular supralabials, nasal, prefrontal, preocular, and ocular discrete. A small, median azygous shield. Frontal, postocular, parietal, and occipital distinct. Postocular supralabial kept from contact with frontal by postocular. Two medium-size temporals dorsal to first (and second) postsupralabials. Snout generally pointed. 3 Supralabials and 2 infralabials. First infralabials much wider and slightly longer than mental. 2 rows of 4 postgenials each between enlarged malars. 197-207 body annuli; 22 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 14-15 dorsal, 12-14 ventral. Median ventral segments slightly enlarged, paired. 6 round precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 6th to 7th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 61)DESCRIPTION (Pattern IV): Meristic characters are summarized in table 5. Figures 31 and 10 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 12 the segment proportions, as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 15 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. The faded types are a uniform, light brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeds within one or two segments just above the lateral sulci. The dorsal surface of the caudal region is somewhat darker than that of the trunk and even the ventral portion of the tail is pigmented. The caudal cap is darkest. The anterior head shields show no major fusions. The rostral is barely visible in dorsal view. Posteriorly, it is followed on each side by a very large nasal shield that occupies the anterior extent of the snout. Along the dorsal midline, this is followed by a large rectangular prefrontal that forms a rounded, posteriorly concave suture with the nasal. A small, shield-shaped azygous shield lies along the midline between and posterior to the prefrontals. Laterally, this shield is excluded from contact with the ocular by the anterior aspect of the frontal, which broadly contacts the prefrontal, and by the point contact between the prefrontal and the postocular. The anterior edge of the frontal flares sharply from the midline to reach the oculars and then gradually narrows to asymmetrical contact with the parietals. The latter widen posteriorly to meet a pair of small occipitals, that derive from the median segments of the first dorsal half-annulus (pertaining to body annulus three?). There are two preocular supralabials; the second is larger and both are kept from contact with the prefrontal by the rectangular preocular. The ocular is rectangular and diagonally placed with the eye visible near the ventralmost apex. The third supralabial is enormous and extends dorsally along the posteroventral side of the ocular to contact the ventral edge of the large postocular. A slightly enlarged first postsupralabial and a smaller second one form the base of the temporal region. A small temporal shield lies dorsal to the second and two large ones follow each other dorsally to cover the bulging side of the head up to the medial row of shields, lying anterior to the first dorsal half-annulus. The back of the zone of enlarged shields is irregular and asymmetrical in the holotype. The occipitals are clearly part of the third dorsal half-annulus, though at the dorsal midline their posterior edge lies anterior to the back of this annulus at the level of the mouth. However, an intercalated dorsal half-annulus becomes wedge-shaped and disappears ventrally some two segments above the level of the mouth. The zone of enlargement corresponds to the dorsal portions of the first three body annuli. The snout is slightly prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The mental is narrower posteriorly than anteriorly and is flanked completely by the enormous first infralabials. The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend anteriorly from the malar junction to the lip. The enlarged trapezoidal malars enclose the posterior portion of the first and all of the second postgenial row, each containing four segments; the lateral postgenials lie posterior to the first infralabials. The ventral segments of the first six body annuli are reduced in size, and the more posterior medial segments widen very gradually. There are 197 to 207 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to eighth discrete dorsal half-annuli may be narrowed and folded and two crescentic dorsal half-annuli lie intercalated between annuli two and three (see above). At midbody an annulus contains 14-15 twice as long as wide dorsal segments and 12 to 14 ventral ones; the medial segments are 2-2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to two to three lateral annuli. The tail (of the one specimen with an entire tail) bears 22 caudal annuli before a conically oval cap that is more than twice as long as the next annulus and generally includes indications of segmental subdivisions all around the base, but not on the distal tip. A narrowed, but not especially pigmented autotomy site occurs on the seventh postcloacal position. (One of the types has a partially healed, autotomized tail.) There are six large round precloacal pores on the posterior edge of the precloacal segments; the holotype shows narrow projecting cores each inserted into the center of the edge of one of six small segments lying anterior to the precloacal shield. The pore-bearing row corresponds to the width of the four midventral segments and exceeds the width of the four enlarged medial segments of the six to seven covering the crescentic precloacal shield. The postcloacal edge is formed of seven to ten segments. The snout is more pointed in dorsal than in lateral view. At the level of the nostrils, it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The temporal region is wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli and the back of the head is slightly constricted. The trunk is rounded anteriorly and variably compressed dorsoventrally thereafter until the base of the tail where the cross section changes to a vertical oval. The lateral sulci start near the 20th body annulus, being indicated anteriorly only by alignment of sutures; at midbody an annulus is less than half the width of an adjacent segment and contains regular intercalated segments. The middorsal sulcus begins near the 60th annulus and is narrower than the lateral ones. It continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail, though the intercalated segments drop out at the level of the cloaca. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 61)
Cynisca schaeferi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials, nasal, prefrontal, preocular, and ocular fused, with shallow blind suture entering a shallowly delimited fused shield from above the level of the eye. Subrectangular frontal, parietal, and pentagonal occipital discrete. First postocular supralabial very large, in contact with frontal. A single trapezoidal temporal dorsal to the first postsupralabial, followed by one smaller one lateral to the occipital. Head pointed. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental fused with first infralabials anteriorly; a large postgenial flanked by one or two small segments; enlarged rectangular malar. 241-252 body annuli; 25-26 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 12 dorsal, 10 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 12 or 0 precloacal pores. Autotomy site at 13th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 63)DESCRIPTION (Pattern XVI): Meristic characters are summarized in table 1. Figures 32 and 10 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 12 the segment proportions, as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 15 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body 6 proportions. This is a relatively large, fairly stout species of Cynisca. Preserved specimens are faded, but there are traces of pigment, suggesting that the tail was darkened. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is relatively small and barely visible in dorsal view. Enormous paired shields cover the anteriormost portion of the bulbously swollen snout and apparently include the regions occupied by the preocular supralabials, the nasals, the preoculars, the oculars, and the prefrontals; the vertical posterior suture of these shields either bisects or follows just posterior to the position of the eye. A blind suture extends anteriorly into this compound shield on each side from the anteriorly convex frontal suture. One specimen (SMF 30263) shows a tiny (ocular?) shield on the left side at the site where the posterior suture of the compound shield sends a tip between the large supralabial and the frontal. The enormous second supralabial (or first postocular one) extends dorsally to broad horizontal contact with the parallel-sided frontal. The irregular parietal is also parallelsided, but slightly narrower than the frontal. Laterally, it is in contact with the first and largest of the irregular temporals that extends dorsally from contact with the first and second (which may be fused) postsupralabial. The temporal may be vertically subdivided (azygously). It is followed posteriorly by the segments of the third body annulus that extend from the third postsupralabial to reach the occipital which tends to be slightly shorter laterally than at the midline. In general, the fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first three body annuli. All specimens show a partial dorsal half-annulus in the nuchal region between the occipital and the dorsal portion of the fourth body annulus. The snout is prognathous and the rostral is clearly visible in ventral view. The lower jaw is not particularly deeply inserted into the bulbous snout, which is almost twice as wide as high and swollen up to the level of the eye. In ventral view, the mental is narrower than the first infralabials, and the anterior sutures separating them do not reach the lip. The suture defining the posterior edges of the very large mental and the flanking first infralabials crosses the chin at the anterior level of the second infralabials, swinging anteriorly in the middle so that the enlarged malars generally correspond to the posterior portion of the median enlarged postgenial, which is flanked by one or two smaller segments on each side and may be posteriorly divided. The ventral segments of the gular region (first five body annuli) are slightly reduced in size and the ventral segments of the following annuli swing slightly anteriorly. There are 241 to 252 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portions of the seventh to eighth discrete dorsal half-annuli are narrowed and deeply folded. At midbody an annulus contains 12 dorsal segments, three times longer than wide, and 10 ventral ones, the medial ones more than 2½ times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three lateral annuli. The tail bears 25 to 26 a caudal annuli before a conically pointed end, which is more than twice as long as the last annulus and bears no indented sutures. An autotomy site is marked at the 13th caudal annulus. It is always well defined, being slightly narrowed and (perhaps) more intensely pigmented. None of the specimens had a broken tail. There are 12 or 0 variably produced precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of a small segment; these 12 segments form a precloacal semicircle that occupies the midventral portion, but separates laterally from the precloacal annulus. The specimens lacking pores also lack discrete segments of this row. This set is wider than the enlarged and paired midventral segments of the preceding annuli and reaches laterally to surround the anterior edge of the oxbow-shaped precloacal shield. The shield consists of two very wide and long median plus two pairs of narrower and shorter flanking segments. The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of 8 to 12 segments. The trunk is generally rounded anteriorly and then becomes slightly wider than high near the midbody and continues thus past the cloacal region. Posterior to the autotomy site, the caudal tip is vertically oval in cross section. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 40th body annulus, are filled with small triangular segments, and at midbody are approximately as wide as half of one of the flanking segments. Anteriorly (for the first 50 or so annuli), the middorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. At midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and it continues as a depressed groove onto the base of the tail. The ventral sulcus also is only indicated by alignment of sutures. (Gans 1987: 63)
Cynisca senegalensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Preocular supralabials fused with nasals, but excluded from contact on the dorsal midline by paired "prefrontals" that have broad contact with the rostral. 2 supralabials and 2 infralabials. Mental wide and larger than flanking first infralabials; malars and second infralabials very slightly enlarged. Head bulbous. 278 body annuli; 23 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 14 dorsal, 7 to 8 ventral. Segments of median ventral row azygous and more than 4 times as wide as long. 9 precloacal pores. Autotomy site at the 7th caudal annulus. (Gans 1987: 65) DESCRIPTION (Pattern XV): Meristic characters are summarized in table 7. Figures 33 and 10 show views of the head, figure 13 the ventral surface of the cloacal region, figure 12 the segment proportions, as well as the pattern at midbody, figure 15 lateral view of tail and caudal region; figure 6 gives the body proportions. This is a small, relatively slender species of Cynisca. The holotype is a uniform, pale brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface. The pigment density increases posteriorly and is greatest on the anterior portion of the tail, specifically on the autotomy annulus. The dorsal pigmentation consists of a very fine speckling of melanocytes expressed within the segments and fading out ventrally. The dorsal surface of the head and of the two to three dorsal half-annuli following thereupon lack obvious pigmentation, as does the chin. The anterior head shields show major fusions. The rostral is relatively sizable and clearly noticeable in dorsal view. It is followed posteriorly by paired prefrontal shields that are unique in the preceding assemblage by excluding the nasals from midline contact. The prefrontals reach from broad contact with the rostral to the transverse prefrontal-frontal suture at the level of the eyes. The nasal is fused with both preocular supralabials. The oculars are large, more or less quadrangular with the corner overlaying the eye representing the ventralmost position. The more posterior portion of the head is covered by the enormous frontal-parietal that is followed posteriorly by the small occipital, though the arrangement of sutures is irregular. The second supralabials are very large and extend to the dorsal surface of the head where they are in broad contact with the anterior portion of the frontal-parietal shield. Posterior to it lie two postsupralabials with a rather small dorsal segment lying dorsal to the posterior one. The remaining portion of the side of the head is occupied by an enormous temporal. The fused head shields occupy the place of the dorsal half of the first two body annuli. The snout is only slightly prognathous and in ventral view the rostral and supralabials are only visible as a narrow crescent. The lower jaw is not markedly inserted in the bulging snout, which is almost twice as wide as high, higher at the preocular region than at the level of the eye. The mental is very wide anteriorly and slightly narrower posteriorly. It is clearly larger than the infralabials. The anterior suture of the second infralabial extends at an angle from the junction of the malars to the lip. The sutures defining the posterior edges of the mental and of the flanking first infralabials crosses the chin at the anterior level of the second infralabials; however, the posterior portion of the mental terminates somewhat anterior to the posterior edges of the first infralabials. This space iS filled by a single wide shield that does extend beyond the edge of the first infralabials, so that it is partly postmental and partly postgenial. It is flanked by two small segments that lie median to the enlarged malars and posterior to the first infralabials. Back of these three median segments lies a second postgenial row of four small segments, the back edge of which aligns with the posterior edge of the second infralabials. The segments of the gular region are slightly reduced in size. The ninth annulus shows the first indication of fusion of the medial segments. The specimen has 278 body annuli from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal rows. The dorsolateral portions of the third through sixth anterior annuli are folded. At midbody an annulus contains 14 always longer than wide dorsal segments and 7 to 8 ventral ones, of which the median ones are azygous and always more than four times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 23 caudal annuli to the oval rounded tip which is more than twice the length of the next anterior annulus. Only faint segmental impressions mark its anterior edge. The seventh postcloacal annulus represents the slightly narrowed and more intensely pigmented autotomy site. All subcaudal segments are paired. There are nine strongly indicated precloacal pores, each inserted into the middle of the posterior edge of one of the nine narrowed median segments of the precloacal annulus. This set corresponds to the width of the azygous ventral segments that reach laterally to the edge of the large and rectangular precloacal shield, which is covered by two very large segments. The postcloacal edge is formed of ten irregular segments. The trunk is generally slightly wider than high; however, it becomes rounder posteriorly and then higher than wide just posterior to the cloacal region. The caudal tip forms a distinct vertical oval in section. The lateral sulci start between the seventh and tenth body annuli and at midbody are filled with very tiny triangular segments approximately as wide as one of the flanking segments. For the first 50 or so annuli, the dorsal sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures; at midbody, it is almost as wide as the lateral ones and continues as a depressed groove onto the tail. There is no ventral sulcus. (Gans 1987: 65)
Cynisca williamsi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A short, slender, pointed-headed amphisbaenian. A large rostral in wide contact with the prefrontals and consequently widely exposed in dorsal view. Two preocular supralabials, nasal, preocular, prefrontal, and ocular discrete. A median azygous shield. Very large and distinct frontals, parietals, and occipitals. Very large postocular supralabial, kept from contact with frontal by large postocular which also extends over anterior portion of postsupralabial, the more posterior portion covered by a small rectangular temporal. Snout generally pointed. 3 supralabials and 2 infralabials. First infralabials enormous, much wider and substantially longer than mental plus discrete postmental. Two rows of postgenials (4, 5); the latter between the short malars. 218 body annuli; 14 caudal annuli. Midbody segments, 16 dorsal, 12-13 ventral. Median ventral segments enlarged, paired. 6 round precloacal pores. A short tail lacking autotomy, and with the distal surface terminating in an oblique, posteriorly facing shield fringed with a ring of projecting rounded cones. Internally, the shield is underlain by a calcified plate that seems associated with the terminal caudal vertebrae.DESCRIPTION (Pattern XVII): The meristic characters are stated in table 4. Figures 34 and 35 show views of the head, figure 36 details of segmentation at midbody, figure 37 views of the cloacal region and tail and details of its distal tip. Figure 38 illustrates an x-ray of the entire animal. This is a relatively small species (assuming that the male is sexually mature). Dimensions are 161 + 10.5 mm snout-vent plus tail length and 4.5 mm midbody diameter. The trunk of the holotype is a uniform dark bluish-brown dorsally and lighter on the ventral surface; the countershading proceeding by general fading within one or two segments just ventral to the lateral sulci and the midventral segments. Pigmentation is very light, although the pigment of the midventral segments definitely drops out in a checkerboard pattern. The precloacal shield is clear. The ventral surface of the tail is pigmented and this pigmentation is particularly obvious toward the distal tip. The head is relatively pale and the pigment of the nuchal segments is concentrated in the center of the segments. All or part of the chin tends to be unpigmented as is the first supralabial. The collagen fibers of the extracolumellar attachment appear as a light area deep to the large first infralabial. The anterior head shields show no obvious fusions and the head segments appear symmetrical. The rostral is visible as a large pentagonal area in dorsal view. On each side it is in broad lateral contact with a very large nasal and posterodorsally it inserts between the anterior aspects of the large prefrontals. A relatively small shield-shaped pentagonal azygous segment lies along the midline with its longer anterior portion inserting between the large prefrontal shields and the shorter posterior one between the very large pentagonal frontals. The anterior edge of each frontal extends posterolaterally from the sides of the azygous to point contact with the dorsal tips of the oculars. The frontals then narrow gradually in long contact with the postocular to contact with the parietals after which they form a blunt angle to the midline. The parietals widen posterior to the frontals and then narrow slightly in contact with a small rectangular temporal. They are followed posteriorly by a short pair of wide occipitals that derive from the median segments of the second body annulus, or of an intercalated dorsal half-annulus (lying between body annuli one and two). There are two preocular supralabials; the second is larger and kept from contact with the prefrontal by the rectangular preocular that is in rectangular contact with the nasal. The polygonal ocular is diagonally placed with the large eye visible in its center. The third supralabial is enormous and extends dorsally along the posteroventral side of the ocular to contact the ventral edge of the large postocular. A large and tall first postsupralabial extends ventral to the posterior aspect of the postocular and then contacts the small rectangular temporal. An intercalated dorsal halfannulus is indicated only by the temporal and the posterior portion of the parietal; it lies anterior to the first dorsal half-annulus corresponding to body annulus one. The temporal region is thus covered almost entirely by the posterior extension of the head shields and the zone of enlargement corresponds to the dorsal portions of the first body annulus. The snout is very markedly prognathous and the rostral is widely visible in ventral view. The mental is narrower posteriorly than anteriorly; it is followed by an elongate postmental and both are flanked by the enormous first infralabials. The anterior sutures of the small second infralabials extend anteriorly from the narrow malar junction to the lip. The first postgenial row comprises four segments, the median much the longest and largest, the lateral ones triangular. The second postgenial row comprises five subequal segments that are flanked by the relatively small wedge-shaped malars, the anterior tips of which just flank the first row. The ventral segments of the first six to seven body annuli are reduced in size; by the 10th annulus the medial ones are squarish and by the 20th they are twice as wide as long. There are 218 body annuli, from the first segment posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. The dorsal portion of the second to eighth anteriormost annuli is only slightly narrowed and there are no intercalated or spiral annuli within the body annuli; however, there is some annular irregularity in the precloacal region. At midbody an annulus contains 16 dorsal segments, the medial ones more than twice as long as wide, whereas the medial segments of the 12 to 13 ventral ones are approximately two times as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three lateral annuli. The tail bears 14 caudal annuli. After the seventh the next three become narrowed and also of reduced diameter. The last annulus is the longest. The posterior aspect of the 14th annulus marks a sharp flat termination, as if the tail had here been cut with a slightly dorsad-facing inclination. The middorsal segments of the 12th, the dorsal segments of the 13th, and all segments of the 14th caudal annulus bear posteriorly projecting cones. A partial semicircle of cones lies within the (14th) ring on each side, whereas the center of the terminal shield is merely rugose. (See below for the underlying osseous structures.) There are six large round precloacal pores (in a continuous row) on the posterior edge of the small precloacal segments lying anterior to the precloacal shield; projecting cores are inserted into the center of each segment. The pore-bearing row corresponds to the width of the six midventral segments and to that of the segments of the eight covering the crescentic precloacal shield. The postcloacal edge is formed of 11 segments. The snout is more pointed in lateral than in dorsal view. At the level of the nostrils it is half as wide as at the level of the postsupralabials. The temporal region is slightly wider than the trunk at the level of the third through eighth annuli and the back of the head is slightly constricted. The trunk is rounded anteriorly and variably compressed dorsoventrally thereafter until the base of the tail, where the cross section changes to a vertical oval. The lateral sulci start near the 30th body annulus and extend just beyond the level of the cloaca. Anteriorly, they are indicated only by alignment of sutures; at midbody each contains multiple, regular intercalated segments. The middorsal sulcus begins near the 10th annulus, but only becomes significantly widened near the 60th. It does not include any small triangular segments and it is not obvious by the level of the cloaca. Thereafter, it continues as a deep groove onto the base of the tail. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by an alignment of sutures. The unique holotype was not dissected. However, a series of x-rays taken at various exposures permits some statements regarding the skeleton. The skull is generally equivalent to those of the round-headed African species. There are no special modifications of the prefrontal region; indeed, the anterior blade of the latter bone provides a simple vertical blade. The quadrate lies almost horizontal and the extracolumella appears to curve along its lateral face (it is unclear whether it here passes in a groove), before extending along the mandible. The head joint is normal, but no special hypocentral ossification is seen. Vertebrae and ribs are as in other species of the group. Near the base of the tail one sees the shift from the two-to-one dermal/ vertebral ratio to the one-to-one ratio characteristic of tails. There is no trace of an autotomy split. Near the 13th caudal vertebra there starts an oblique heavily ossified plate that terminates the tail. It is heaviest immediately deep to the caudal shield and its base then curves inward to join the modified 14th and 15th caudal vertebrae. (Gans 1987: 65)
Dalophia angolensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Gans 1976: 6 Description: Gans 1976: 6 Diagnosis. A slender, medium-sized (290 to 362 mm. snout-vent length) species of Dalophia that lacks pigmentation and has 302 to 324 body and 20 to 27 caudal annuli, 16 to 24 (generally 18) dorsal and 12 to 18 (generally 14) ventral a segments to a midbody annulus and four or five first plus eight to 11 (generally eight or nine) second postgenials. The head shields are broadly fused and only the lateral blind sutures remain. There are no preoculars and the nasals (in narrow contact medially) almost always extend long wings laterally to touch the oculars. There are six elongate pectoral shields, the lateral ones often asymmetrically subdivided and the two medial pairs generally extending anteriorly into one or two annular rows. Lateral sulci are clearly expressed, but the dorsal sulcus is only indicated by intersegmental alignment. The sixth or seventh caudal annulus bears the well-defined autotomy constriction. There are few supernumerary dorsal half-annuli, but the second 50 body annuli tend to show irregular dorso-ventral alignments. The intersegmental sutures of the first 100 or so body annuli form anteriorly acute angles with the mid-line. The middorsal caudal segments posterior to the autotomy constriction are at least twice as wide as those near the base of the tail; the caudal interannular sutures form an anteriorly acute angle on the middorsal surface. (Broadley et al. 1976: 446)Description. This is a medium-sized slender species of Dalophia with the available specimens ranging from 131 to 362 mm. snout-vent length (fig. 35). None of the specimens shows pigmentation. The azygous head shield is single, more or less is pointed anteriorly, oval and relatively slender. The oculars are only partially inserted into shallow notches along its sides. A short, blind suture proceeds anteromedially for one-fifth of the shield width from each notch. The preocular region is slightly concave, however the dorsal surface of the head is faintly convex particularly along the medial line. The shield shows a high dome in transverse section. The eye is clearly visible beneath the medium-sized rectangular ocular which is in contact dorsally and anteriorly with the azygous head shield, anteroventrally with the prolongation of the nasal (excluded in NMSR 2826), ventrally with the second and generally the anterior tip of the third supralabial and posteriorly with the first of the four parietals (the medial pair the longest) that connect dorsally between the third supralabials and separate the head shields from the first body annulus. The crescent-shaped nostrils are inserted into elongate nasals which send long posterior processes to contact the ocular (except in NMSR 2826) and are generally in narrow medial contact with each other, but not with the lip. There are three supralabials, the second the longest, the third the largest and tallest. The lower jaw is covered by a broadly rectangular mental with markedly flaring anterior edges and anteriorly concave suture with the postmental, the small first, second, and enormous third infralabials, and the squat, pentagonal postmental (genial). The rectangular lateral first postgenials may or may not contact the postmental. Median to them lies a pair of subtriangular segments that either contact each other medially, or contact a tiny fifth postgenial of the first row posterior to the blunt apex of the postmental. There are six to 11 smaller second postgenials in a row that extends posterior to the medial aspects of the second infralabials as well and adjoins the deep gular fold. The modified pectoral region extends to the tenth to twelfth (generally to the eleventh) body annulus. There are six elongate and subparallel pectoral shields, the median pair slightly wider posteriorly, the next lateral widest anteriorly and the irregular lateral pair the shortest. The last (or its fission products) correspond to three to five (six in NMSR 2826) dorsal half-annuli, and the more median pairs involve six. The ventromedian segments of the next more anterior annulus are enlarged, and the four segments flanking the midline represent a complex elongation of the median pair of pectoral shields. The prepectoral annulus is definitely involved in the pectoral region. The pectoral region projects slightly posteriorly in a semicircle that distorts the post-pectoral annuli. There are 302 to 324 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to, but not including, the precloacal shield. The second 50 body annuli tend to show up to five supernumerary dorsal half-annuli as well as irregular dorsoventral alignments. A midbody annulus has 16 to 24 (generally 18) dorsal and 12 to 18 (generally 14) ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately twice as long as wide and the midventral segments one and one-half to two times as wide as long. The number of dorsal segments is consistently greater than the number of ventral segments for any given specimen. There is a marked tendency for the sutures between the dorsal segments to angle into posteriorly directed chevrons along much of the back. There are two to six (generally four or five) lateral annuli, the anterior one or two of which contact the small lateral segments of the six to eight (the median pair the largest) forming the precloacal shield. There are no precloacal pores. The stout and fairly long tail appears slightly compressed laterally and downward-curved. Its distal portion is taller than wide and its height drops abruptly over the last four of 20 to 27 (generally 23 to 27) caudal annuli. The tail terminates in a projecting and unsegmented callous pad slightly longer than a preceding annulus. There is a clear autotomy constriction at the sixth or seventh caudal annulus. In dorsal view the median segments of the tail are seen to be widened posterior to the autotomy site and the interannular raphes begin to form anteriorly open Vs midway between the autotomy site and the distal tip. The lateral sulci are strongly marked and about two-thirds as wide as an adjacent segment. The dorsal sulcus is clearly indicated by a widening of the median intersegmental raphe and irregular alignment of left and right quarter-annuli, but is not otherwise developed nor are there diagonal folding lines. There is no ventral sulcus. (Broadley et al. 1976: 446)
Dalophia ellenbergeri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A medium-sized (365 to 420 mm. snout-vent length in adults), slender species of Dalophia lacking dark pigmentation. The species has 312 to 344 body, three to four lateral and 35 to 43 (one specimen has 30) caudal annuli, 14 to 21 (generally 16 or 18) dorsal plus 11 to 14 (generally 12) ventral segments to a midbody annulus and two to five (generally four) first and four to nine (generally seven or eight) second postgenials. The azygous head shields are broadly fused and only lateral blind sutures occur (even in juveniles). The most heavily keratinized zone does not reach the parietal edge of the shield in juveniles. There are no preoculars. The nasals are usually in medial contact and generally fail to reach the lip; their slender posterior processes usually make contact with the oculars. There are four parietal shields. The elongate pectoral region has six slender shields, the medial ones slightly wider posteriorly and the lateral ones irregular. The four midventral segments of the precloacal annulus are enlarged and more or less wedged between the medial and adjoining pairs of pectorals. Lateral sulci are clearly expressed, but the middorsal sulcus is shown by aligned intersegmental sutures or a zigzag pattern caused by non-alignment of dorsal quarter-annuli. Additions or subtractions of dorsal half-annuli are few, but occur primarily in the second and third 50 body annuli. The species has but traces of herringbone pattern of the dorsal interannular sutures of the trunk. There is a well-marked caudal autotomy site of the sixth to eighth (generally seventh or eighth) caudal annulus. The middorsal segments of the tail may be partially or completely fused across the midline. The interannular sutures here form an anteriorly acute set of angles with the median (their points may be rounded). Each leg of the chevron is as wide as three or four more anterior segments. (Broadley et al. 1976: 451)Description. This is a medium-sized but slender species of Dalophia with the available specimens ranging from 115 to 420 mm. snout-vent length (fig. 35). All specimens are unpigmented. The azygous large head shields are always fused to form an oval shield, pointed anteriorly, with lateral blind sutures which are retained throughout life. The dorsal surface of the head is convex in profile. The eye is clearly visible as a dark spot beneath the squarish ocular, which is in contact with the nasal anteriorly and the parietals posteriorly. There are no preoculars or postoculars. Two pairs of parietal shields separate the azygous head shield from the first body annulus; the median pair is the widest, but the lateral pair may extend anteriorly to contact the second supralabial below the ocular. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and are inserted into elongate nasal scales which usually make contact with the oculars. They usually fail to reach the lip and are usually in point contact with, or narrowly separated from, each other above the triangular rostral. There are three supralabials, the second the longest. The lower jaw is formed by a pentagonal mental, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials, and a large heart-shaped postmental (genial), which is longitudinally divided in UM 7913. Posterior to the postmental are two to five (usually four) first postgenials followed by four to nine (usually seven or eight) smaller second postgenials. The modified pectoral region extends to the ninth through the twelfth dorsal annulus; there are six elongate pectorals, the medial ones slightly wider posteriorly. The four midventral segments of the prepectoral annulus are enlarged and the outer pair of these are wedged between first and second pairs of pectorals. The lateral pectorals are much shorter than the medial ones, which extend posteriorly in a semicircular bulge that distorts the postpectoral annulus strongly and the succeeding few to lesser extent. There are 312 to 344 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. A maximum of five supernumerary dorsal half-annuli may be present, usually in the second 50 body annuli. Other dorsal half-annuli may drop out, especially in the third 50 body annuli. A mid-body annulus has 14 to 21 dorsal plus 11 to 14 (usually 12) ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately one and a-half to three times as long as wide, and the midventral segments are approximately two to four times as wide as long. The sutures between dorsal segments are often angled to form a pattern of posteriorly directed chevrons. There are three to four (rarely two asymmetrically) lateral annuli and six precloacal segments, the median pair largest. There are no precloacal pores. The elongate tail (fig. 36) appears dorsoventrally flattened in cross section and curves ventrally to an unsegmented truncated and callous terminal pad. On the dorsal surface of the tail posterior to the autotomy annulus the middorsal segments are nearly twice as wide as long; some may be partially or completely fused and are angled to form a series of posteriorly directed chevrons. There are 35 to 43 (30 in FMNH 142694) caudal annuli, with the seventh or eighth (sixth in FMNH 142685) a distinctly narrowed autotomy annulus. Six specimens had autotomized tails (which show faint irregular segmentation of the stump) and several others show partial breaks at this point. The lateral sulci are distinct and a dorsal sulcus may be indicated either by an alignment of the vertebral sutures or a zigzag pattern caused by nonalignment of dorsal quarter-annuli, so that they alternate on either side of the vertebral line; a similar situation may develop along the midventral line. There are no diagonal folding lines on the body. (Broadley et al. 1976: 451)
Dalophia gigantea	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description: “Une ou 2 grandes plaques sur le dessus de la tête; museau à contour horizonlal arrondi; rostrale très petite, 6 fois aussi large que haute; nasales tres allongées. formant une suture au-dessus de la rostrale et s'étendant jusqu'à la préoculaire: oculaire très petite; œil invisible; une préoculaire, un peu plus grande que l'oculaire: 3 labiales supérioures, la 3° la plus haute mais moins allongée que la 2°. qui est un peu plus de 2 fois aussi longue que la 1°: symphysiale plus grande que les labiales adjacentes, suivie d'une grande mentonnière heptagonale, elle-mème suivie de 2 paires de plaques plus petites; 3 labiales inféricures, la 3° énorme. Queue de même diamètre que le corps. carrément tronquée à l'extrémité, qui est recouverte d'une grande plaque arrondie: 311 à 314 anneaux sur le corps (comptés à partir des pectorales). 25 à 26 sur la queue: un anneau an milieu du tronc comprend 37 à 38 segments (19 à 20 dorsaux el 18 ventraux): les 2 segments ventraux médians un pen plus larges que longs: anneaux caudaux ne formant pas de séries obliques: 6 grandes plaques pectorales tres allongées, celles de la paire médiane 'élargissant graduellement vers l'arrière: 6 segments préanaux; pas de pores préanaux.” (Witte 1954: 991)Diagnosis. A very large (582 to 705 mm. snout-vent length) species of Dalophia lacking pigmentation and having 316 to 321 body annuli, 21 to 23 caudal annuli, 19 to 21 (generally 20) dorsal and 17 to 19 (generally 18) ventral segments to a midbody annulus and four first plus eight to 10 second postgenials. The two very large, discrete, and azygous head shields show narrow medial fusion of their keratinous cover in one specimen (RGMC 32). The preoculars are well defined and may be but partially separated from the anterior shield (medially in broad contact). The nasals (or their postnasals) contact the preoculars. There are six pectoral shields, with the second on each side not reaching the posterior edge of the zone, and the two medial pairs extending anteriorly into two annular rows. Lateral and middorsal sulci are deeply expressed. There is a tendency to extra dorsal half-annuli in the second 50 body annuli. The species lacks caudal autotomy and shows no fusion or herringbone effect on the dorsal surface of trunk or tail.  (Broadley et al. 1976: 456)Description. This is the largest species of Dalophia with the available specimens ranging from 582 to 705 mm. snout-vent length (fig. 35). All specimens lack pigmentation. The dorsal surface of the head is divided into two azygous shields although the small RGMC 32 shows the medial half of the division fused and overlain by a thick sheet of keratin. The largest specimen, RGMC 4573, also has a slight asymmetrical zone of fusion of this line. The midline is slightly concave over the anterior and convex over the posterior shield, with the convexity much greater transversely. Both azygous shields, the preocular, as well as the posterior edge of (nasal or postnasal) and/or the posterior edge of the second supralabial may show local keratinization to different degrees. In RGMC 32, the smallest specimen seen, the heavy keratinization is most marked on the spade, the medial isthmus and the center of the posterior shield, whereas the lateral, preocular, and posteriorly peripheral regions show a much thinner coat. The preoculars are large and generally well defined (except in the syntype where part of their anterior raphe is fused). They are unique in the group in that they occupy the entire postero-lateral corners of the first azygous shield, rather than being inserted into its posterior edge with a strip of shield lateral to them (compare illustrations for D. welwitschi and species of Monopeltis). The preoculars are in ventral contact with postnasal and second supralabial. The eye is very faintly visible beneath the quadrangular ocular, which is in contact dorsally with the second azygous shield, anteriorly with the preocular, ventrally with the second supralabial, and posteriorly with a tiny triangular temporal. Sometimes it contacts a more dorsal and larger segment, that may be defined either as discrete postocular plus the first parietal, or as the first and second parietals of the row of eight that dorsally connect the third supralabials and separate the head shields from the first body annulus. The crescent-shaped nostrils are inserted in the relatively long nasals that generally contact the preoculars, although their posterior tips may form a separate segment. The nasals are in broad medial contact with each other, but well separated from the lips. There are three supralabials, the second the longest, the third the tallest. The lower jaw is covered by a wide mental with flaring lateral edges that show an anteriorly rounded projection and is in more or less straight contact with the postmental, by the small first, second, and enormous third infralabials, as well as by the squat, septangular postmental (genial). The elongate rectangular lateral segments of the first row of postgenials rarely make even point contact with the postmental. Medially they are joined by the triangular second pair of the row which are in point contact with each other posterior to the blunt postmental apex. There are eight to 10 segments to the second row of postgenials which lie anterior to the first deep gular fold. The modified pectoral region extends to the eighth through tenth body annuli. There are six elongate subparallel pectoral shields, the median the longest and posteriorly the widest, the next lateral the widest anteriorly and the lateralmost parallel-sided (some of the more lateral segments may also be asymmetrically fused). This smooth zone corresponds to five or six dorsal half-annuli. The medial segments of an anterior annulus are variably enlarged and also incorporated into the pectoral zone. There are 316 to 321 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. There is a tendency to a few supernumerary half-annuli in the second 50 body annuli. A midbody annulus has 19 to 24 (generally 20) dorsal plus 16 to 19 (generally 18) ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately one and one-half to two times as long as wide and the midventral segments slightly wider than long. The number of dorsal segments is slightly greater than the number of ventral segments in any specimen. There are generally four lateral annuli, the first one or two in contact with the small lateral segments of the six (the medial pair the largest) forming the precloacal shield. There are no precloacal pores. The tail is round in section, stout, and shows a slight ventral curve near its distal tip. The vertical dimension increases near its base and decreases again over the terminal four of the 21 to 23 caudal annuli. There is no autotomy and the unsegmented caudal cap is about one annulus thick and presents a smooth, oval callous surface that may extend slightly onto the dorsal surface as well. The medial row of dorsal segments is significantly widened posterior to the caudal base, but the interannular sutures cross the tail at right angles to its long axis. The lateral sulci are well marked and approximately as wide as an adjacent segment. The middorsal sulcus is clearly marked but somewhat narrower. There are no diagonal folding lines and the ventral sulcus is only is indicated by alignment of intersegmental raphes. (Broadley et al. 1976: 456)
Dalophia longicauda	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A medium to large (360 to 520 mm. snout-vent length in adults) species of Dalophia, with the dorsal surface (particularly of the posterior portion of the body) darkened by gray speckling that may concentrate at the annular edges. The species has 307 to 338 body, two to five lateral and 33 to 42 caudal annuli, 18 to 24 (generally 20 or 22) dorsal plus 12 to 16 (generally 14) ventral segments to a midbody annulus and three to six (generally four or five) first and eight to 13 (generally nine, 10, or 11) second postgenials. The azygous head shields are broadly fused and only blind lateral sutures remain. There are no preoculars. The nasals are usually in median contact and usually just fail to reach the lip, their slender posterior processes (or asymmetrically split off postnasals) make contact with the oculars. There are four parietal shields. The pectoral region has six elongate shields, often somewhat irregularly arranged, but with the median pair always widest posteriorly. The four midventral segments of the prepectoral annulus are more or less wedged between the medial and adjoining pairs of pectorals. Lateral sulci are clearly expressed, as is the middorsal one after the first third of the trunk. There are generally a few supernumerary dorsal half-annuli, mainly in the second 50 body annuli. The dorsal interannular sutures of the postnuchal region tend to form a herringbone pattern, the angle of which is affected by the degree to which the head is raised. There is no autotomy annulus. The middorsal segments of the tail are partially or completely fused across the midline. The interannular sutures here form an anteriorly acute set of angles with the median (their points may be rounded). Each leg of the chevron is as wide as three or four more anterior segments. (Broadley et al. 1976: 459)Description. This is a medium to large-sized species with the available specimens ranging from 155 to 520 mm. in snout-vent length (fig. 35). The head and first 30 body annuli are unpigmented but the rest of the dorsum is lightly speckled with gray, the pigmentation being concentrated toward the edges of annuli and extending ventral to the lateral sulci; the pigmentation on the tail may extend right across the ventral segments. The azygous large head shields are always fused to form an oval shield, more or less pointed anteriorly and notched laterally to accommodate the oculars, from which blind lateral sutures extend anteriorly. The dorsal surface of the head is concave anteriorly and convex posteriorly; it forms a sigmoid curve in profile. The eye is usually visible as a dark spot beneath the subhexagonal ocular. Two pairs of parietals separate the large head shield from the first body annulus; the medial pair is the widest. An elongate triangular postocular is usually wedged between the outer parietal and the third supralabial. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and are inserted into elongate nasal scales that make contact with the oculars (or asymmetrically split off postnasals); they are usually in good contact with one another dorsal to the triangular rostral and usually just fail to reach the lip. There are three supralabials, the second the longest. The lower jaw is formed by a squarish mental, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials and a large shield-shaped postmental (genial). Posterior to the postmental are three to six (usually four or five) first and eight to 13 elongate second postgenials. The postmental may contact the second row of postgenials on the midventral line, or the large median pair of first postgenials may be separated by small azygous scale. The modified pectoral region extends to the ninth through the twelfth body annulus; there are six elongate shields, the medial pair widened posteriorly, the lateral pair often shorter than the inner ones and corresponding to only four or five, instead of six, dorsal half-annuli. The four midventral segments of the prepectoral annulus are enlarged and the outer pair are diamond-shaped and wedged between the two inner pairs of pectorals. The whole pectoral region projects posteriorly in a semicircle that strongly distorts the first postpectoral annulus and the succeeding few to a lesser extent. There are 307 to 338 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. Supernumerary dorsal half-annuli are usually few (maximum 13 in UM 23057) and mostly fall in the second 50 body annuli. A few dorsal half-annuli drop out here and there. A midbody annulus has 18 to 24 dorsal plus 12 to 16 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately two to three times as long as wide and the midventral segments one and a-half to three times as wide as long. Intersegmental raphes are more or less parallel to the longitudinal body axis. There are two to five lateral annuli and four to six precloacal segments. There are no precloacal pores. The elongate tail (fig. 36) appears subcylindrical or slightly flattened above and below in cross section and terminates in an unsegmented callous pad. The middorsal segments (except for few proximal ones) are fused and form posteriorly directed chevrons; there may also be a few fused midventral segments. There are 33 to 42 caudal annuli and no trace of autotomy, despite extensive damage to the tails of some specimens by bulldozers. The lateral and middorsal sulci are distinct. There are no diagonal folding lines on the body. (Broadley et al. 1976: 459)
Dalophia luluae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: “Une seule grande plaque sur le dessus de la tête; museau obtusément pointu; rostrale très petite, un peu plus de. 2 fois aussi large que haute; nasales très allongées, formant une suture au-dessus de la rostrale, s'é tendant jusqu'à l'oculaire; oculaire très petite; œil plus ou moins dis tinct; pas de préoculaire; 3 labiales supérieures, la troisième la plus grande, mais moins allongée que la deuxième, qui est un peu plus de 2 fois plus longue que la première; symphysiale plus grande que les labiales adjacentes, suivie d'une grande mentonnière pentagonale, elle même suivie de 4 plaques plus petites, les externes étant plus longues et plus étroites que les internes; 3 labiales inférieures, la troisième énorme. Queue de même diamètre que le corps, plus ou moins tronquée à l'extrémité, qui est recouverte d'une grande plaque arrondie. 310 anneaux sur le tronc (comptés à partir de pectorales), 19 sur la queue; un anneau au milieu du corps renferme 29 segments, 16 dorsaux, 13 ventraux; les deux segments ventraux médians environ 2 fois aussi larges que longs; anneaux caudaux ne. formant pas de séries obliques. 6 grandes plaques pectorales très allongées, celles de la paire médiane s'élargissant gra duellement en arrière. 6 segments préanaux; pas de pores préanaux. Uniformément d'un blanc rosâtre” (Witte & Laurent 1942)
Dalophia pistillum	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A medium to large (320 to 560 mm. snout-vent length in adults) species of Dalophia, with the dorsal surface (generally to just ventral of the lateral sulci, sometimes irregularly more ventral, particularly beneath the tail) with gray speckling that may concentrate along the annular and segmental edges. The species has 280 to 352 body, two to five lateral and 19 to 33 caudal annuli, 17 to 30 (generally 20, 22, or 24) dorsal plus 12 to 17 (generally 14) ventral segments to a midbody annulus and two to six (usually four) first and seven to 14 (generally nine to 10) second postgenials. The azygous head shields are broadly fused and only blind lateral sutures remain (absent in one specimen). The most heavily keratinized zone does not reach the parietal edge of the shield and is also scalloped medially over the blind sutures. There are no preoculars. The nasals are usually in median contact and usually just fail to reach the lip, their slender posterior processes (or asymmetrically split off postnasals) usually contact the oculars. There are four (rarely six) parietal shields. The pectoral region has six elongate shields, often somewhat irregularly arranged and with the medial pair much the widest posteriorly. The four midventral segments of the precloacal annulus are enlarged and more or less wedged between the medial and adjoining pairs of pectorals. Lateral and middorsal sulci are clearly expressed, particularly in larger specimens. Additions or subtractions of dorsal half-annuli are few, but occur mainly in the second 50 body annuli. The species lacks a herringbone pattern of dorsal interannular sutures on the trunk as well as caudal autotomy. The middorsal segments of the tail may be partially or completely fused across the midline. The interannular sutures here form an anteriorly acute set of angles with the median (their points are often rounded). Each leg of the chevron is as wide as three or four more anterior segments. [See section on geographic variation.] (Broadley et al. 1976: 463)Description. This is a medium to large-sized species, with the available specimens ranging from 130 to 560 mm. snout-vent length (fig. 35). The anterior quarter of the body is usually unpigmented, but thereafter there is light gray speckling on the dorsum that may concentrate along the annular sutures; sometimes this speckling extends irregularly ventral to the lateral sulci, whereas on the tail the pigmentation may extend right across the ventral segments. In UM 22703 the posterior three-quarters of the dorsum is heavily pigmented with gray and there are gray blotches on the dorsal surface of the tail including the caudal cap. The azygous large head shields are always fused to form an oval shield, more or less pointed anteriorly, with lateral blind sutures that are retained throughout life (lost in UM 22703). The dorsal surface of the head is concave anteriorly and convex posteriorly, forming a sigmoid curve in profile. The eye is usually visible as a dark spot beneath the subhexagonal ocular. Two (rarely three) pairs of parietals separate the head shield from the first body annulus; the medial pair is the widest. An elongate triangular postocular is usually wedged between the outer parietal and the third supralabial. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and are inserted into elongate nasal scales that are usually in contact with the oculars (or asymmetrically split off postnasals), except in some eastern specimens in which they are well separated. The nasals are usually in good contact with each other above the triangular rostral; they usually just fail to reach the lip. There are three supralabials, the second the longest. The lower jaw is formed by a squarish mental, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials and a large shield-shaped postmental (genial). Posterior to the postmental are two to six (usually four) first and seven to 14 elongate second row postgenials. The medial first row postgenials may be separated by the distal wedge of the postmental. The modified pectoral region extends to the ninth to twelfth body annulus. There are six elongate shields; the median pair is much widened posteriorly, the lateral pair often shorter than the medial ones and corresponds to only two to five, instead of six, dorsal half-annuli. The four midventral segments of the prepectoral annulus are enlarged and the outer pair of these are wedged between the first and second pairs of pectorals. The entire pectoral region projects posteriorly in a semicircle which distorts the postpectoral annulus strongly and the succeeding few to a lesser extent. There are 280 to 352 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. A few dorsal half-annuli may be added or subtracted, mainly in the second 50 body annuli. A midbody annulus has 17 to 30 dorsal plus 12 to 17 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately two to three times as long as wide and the midventral segments one and a-half to three times as wide as long. Only anteriorly is there a slight tendency for sutures between dorsal segments to be angled to form posteriorly directed chevrons. There are two to five lateral annuli and four to SIX precloacal segments, the median pair the largest. There are no precloacal pores. The moderate tail (fig. 36) appears slightly flattened dorsally and ventrally and terminates in an unsegmented callous pad. The middorsal segments are usually partially or completely fused to form posteriorly directed chevrons (not fused or chevron shaped in UM 22703). There are 19 to 33 caudal annuli and no autotomy. The lateral and middorsal sulci are distinct. There are no diagonal folding lines on the body. (Broadley et al. 1976: 463)
Dalophia welwitschii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (genus). Very similar to Monopeltis, but nasal shields almost always separated by rostral segment, no precloacal pores, generally only a single cephalic shield, always a modified pectoral region, and tip of the tail always squarely truncate and produced into a flattened callous pad. Table 2 presents meristic differences for all but the northernmost populations. (Broadley et al. 1976, Modified after Vanzolini 1951)Diagnosis. A medium-sized (268 to 293 mm. snout-vent length) species of Dalophia lacking pigmentation and having 264 to 270 body and 19 caudal annuli, 17 to 20 dorsal, and 14 to 17 ventral segments to a midbody annulus and four first plus eight or nine second postgenials. The head shields are broadly fused and only lateral blind sutures remain. The types lack preoculars, but USNM 26387 retains traces thereof, and the nasals (which are not in contact medially) are excluded from contact with the ocular regions by the third supralabial, which broadly touches the head shield. The two lateral pairs of the six pectoral shields are irregularly divided and the anterior zone of the medial pairs extends into two annular rows. Lateral sulci are deeply incised and the middorsal sulcus is mainly shown as a zigzag alignment of intersegmental sutures, the dorsal surface of the trunk being crisscrossed by deep diagonal folds. The fifth or sixth caudal annulus bears the autotomy constriction. There are neither fusions nor herring-bone patterns along the segments of the dorsal surface of the tail. (Broadley et al. 1976: 442)Description. This is small to medium-sized species of Dalophia with the available specimens ranging from 268 to 293 mm. snout-vent length (fig. 35). The specimens are faded or the species lacks pigmentation. The azygous head shield is single (more or less pointed anteriorly), and oval; blind, anteriorly directed sutures enter from the anteromedial tip of the ocular and extend for sixth (to a third) of the width of the shield. (One specimen shows a preocular, the keratinization of the anterior edge of which is partially fused.) The eye is faintly visible as a dark spot deep beneath the tiny subpentagonal ocular which is in contact dorsally with the posterior portion of the azygous shield, anteriorly with the anterior portion thereof (or the preocular), ventrally with the third infralabial, and posteriorly with the first of four parietals (the medial pair the longest) that connect the third supralabials and separate the head shields from the first body annulus. The crescent-shaped nostrils insert into elongate nasals that send long posterior processes that do not reach the oculars (or preoculars), the lip, or each other. There are three supralabials, the first the smallest, the second by far the longest, and the third the tallest. The lower jaw iS covered by a wide, rectangular mental with flaring anterior sides and complexly curved posterior contact with the postmental, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials, and the large, heart-shaped post-mental (genial). The two rectangular lateral segments of the first postgenial row may or may not contact the postmental; the triangular medial first postgenials contact each other behind the posterior apex of the postmental. There are eight to nine second postgenials anterior to the deep gular folds. The modified pectoral region extends to the eighth through the tenth body annulus. There are six elongate and subparallel pectoral shields, the medial pair widest posteriorly (but almost perfectly parallel), and the lateral pairs showing irregular fusions. The enlarged shields correspond to five or six dorsal half-annuli. The next anterior annulus is widened medially and involved in the pectoral shield and produces two large median segments that interdigitate between the first and second shields on each side. The pectoral region projects posteriorly in a semicircle that distorts the following body annuli. There are 264 to 270 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. One or two supernumerary dorsal half-annuli occur in the first 50 body annuli, six or seven in the second 50, and none thereafter. A midbody annulus has 17 to 20 dorsal plus 14 to 17 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately two to two and one-half times as long as wide and the midventral segments one and one-half times as wide as long. There is faint tendency for the sutures between the dorsal segments to angle into posteriorly directed chevrons. There are three to five lateral annuli, two of which contact the outer of the six precloacal shields, of which the median pair is widest (and the intersegmental sutures angle posteromedially, rather than paralleling the long axis). There are no precloacal pores. The moderate tail appears slightly compressed laterally and down-curved. Its distal portion is taller than wide and its height drops abruptly over the last four of the 19 caudal annuli. The tail terminates in a projecting and unsegmented, vertically oval callous pad with the projection slightly longer than a preceding annulus. In dorsal view the interannular sutures cross the tail transversely without herringbone effect. The fifth or sixth caudal annulus bears the autotomy constriction. The lateral sulci are deep and distinct and as wide as an adjacent segment. There is some trace of a middorsal sulcus as a zigzag alignment of intersegmental sutures and irregularities; the dorsal surface of the trunk is crisscrossed by an unusual density of deep, diagonal folding lines. The ventral sulcus is indicated only by alignment of intersegmental raphes. (Broadley et al. 1976: 442)
Geocalamus acutus	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Rostral large, its posterior angle inserted between the prefrontals; nasal distinct, between rostral, first and second labials, and prefrontal; a pair of prefrontals; frontal moderate (said to give off a small azygous scale posteriorly in the type of noltei); a pair of postfrontals; no parietals (being fused with postfrontals); a pair of rudimentary occipitals present or absent; no supraocular; no preocular; ocular moderate, eye distinct or hidden; 3 upper labials, first small, second and third larger, subequal; 2-4 temporals descending to the commissure of the mouth; mental moderate, subquadrangular; 2 (very rarely 3) large lower labials, subequal or first smaller; postmental moderate; 4-5 chin shields in anterior row, 4-6 in posterior row; 209-222 annuli on body, 21-26 on tail (9 in injured type of noltei); 38-42 (18-20 + 20-22) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments nearly equilateral; pectoral segments feebly differentiated, slightly longer than broad, forming an anteriorly-directed angularseries; 6 (said to be 4 in type of noltei) anals, subject to much division; 4 preanal pores.Diagnosis: 38-42 segments in a midbody annulus; 209-222 annuli on body, 21-23 on tail; 3 upper labials; 4 preanal pores.Coloration. Above uniformly violet brown (flesh-pink in life) except for the intersegmental grooves which are white; below pure white, or subcaudal segments mottled with brown.Measurements. Total length of 9 , 281 (248 + 33) mm.Source: Loveridge 1941.
Geocalamus modestus	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description (genus): Head compressed, snout laterally compressed but rounded; nostril lateral or slightly inferior, pierced in a small nasal; a gular fold; no vertebral line, a faint lateral line, no ventral line; pectoral segments slightly enlarged forming an angular series; preanalpores; tail cylindrical, obtuse.Description. Rostral large, its posterior angle inserted between the prefrontals; nasal distinct, or incompletely separated from first labial anteriorly, between rostral, first and second labials, and prefrontal; a pair of prefrontals; frontal moderate, distinct, or incompletely separated from the prefrontals; a pair of postfrontals; no parietals (being fused with postfrontals); a pair of rudimentary oceipitals; no supraocular; no preocular; ocular moderate, eye distinct; 3 upper labials, first small, second and third larger, subequal; 3-4 temporals descending to the commissure of the mouth; mental moderate, subquadrangular; 3 lower labials, first small, second and third subequal; postmental moderate; 4 chin shields in anterior row, 7 in posterior row, or outermost of the two rows fused to form an elongate sublabial; 238-241 annuli on body, 29 on tail; 34-38 (16-18 + 18-20) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments nearly equilateral; pectoral segments feebly differentiated, slightly longer than broad, forming an anteriorly-directed angular series; 6 anals; 3-4 preanal pores.Diagnosis: 34-38 segments in a midbody annulus; 238-241 annuli on body, 29 on tail; 3 upper labials; 3-4 preanal pores.Dentition. Premaxillary teeth 3, maxillaries 3-3, mandibulars 7-7.Coloration. Above uniformly violet brown (plumbeous in life) except for the intersegmental grooves which are white; below pure white (somewhat transparent in life).Measurements. Total length 274 (240 + 34) mm.Source: Loveridge 1941.
Leposternon infraorbitale	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	IDENTIFICATION: Leposternon infraorbitale can be identified by the following characteristics [based on Gans' (1971) key to Leposternon species]: a single, very small first supralabial followed by a large second and a small third supralabial; azygous shield separated from contact with the rostronasal by a wide suture between prefrontals; frontals about as wide as long, not significantly larger than the azygous, temporals much smaller; generally an infraocular; a very large first infralabial; pectoral segments only slightly enlarged, rounded sometimes with irregular longitudinal fusions; precloacal pores lacking; dorsal number of postpectoral annuli always five to 25 higher than ventral number; 95 to 100 body vertebrae; 236 to 275 ventral, and 259 to 304 dorsal, postpectoral half-annuli; 25.6 to 33 ventral and 22.3 to 31.4 dorsal segments per midbody annulus; 10 to 13 caudal annuli; adults very large (snout-vent length equals 285-600) (Gans 1971).In addition, L. infraorbitale can be easily identified by the absence of precloacal pores, and the presence of supraocular shields, an azygous shield distinct from the frontal shields, and 3/3 supralabials (Ribeiro et al. 2015).
Leposternon microcephalum	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (genus): relatively large and robust body, head dorsoventrally compressed, nostrils opening on the ventral surface of snout, suture connecting each nostril to the edge of mouth, nasal shield absent, rostronasal shield followed by a sequence of one to five enlarged shields along the dorsal surface of head, gular portion without segmental cover, more than two dermal annuli per vertebrae, tail very short with rounded tip, autotomic site absent on tail, and none to four preocloacal pores (Ribeiro et al., 2008, Ribeiro et al. 2011).IDENTIFICATION: Leposternon microcephalum can be identified by the following characteristics [based on Gans' (1971) key to Leposternon species]: three or more rows of enlarged shields atop the head, suture pattern often complex; pectoral region complex or not; a very large first supralabial followed by a smaller second supralabial; azygous often fused in various ways with adjacent head shields; a medial pair of elongate pectoral shields, with other modified, possibly enlarged shields radiating out from these anteriorly; always significantly (5-25) more dorsal than ventral postpectoral annuli with the increase greater in the second-fifth, third-fifth, and fourth-fifth of the trunk; (177-242 postpectoral annuli) (Gans 1971). In addition, L. microcephalum can be identified by the absence of precloacal pores, and the presence the supraocular shields, azygous shield distinct of the frontal, 2/2 supralabials, 2/2 infralabials, parietals distinct, prefrontals representing less than 30% (was incorrectly stated as being more than 28% in the key to the species) of the head length [14.5–29.5% (n = 71; Mean = 22.1; SD ± 2.5)], and azygous representing less than 59% of head width [29.6–58.8 % (n = 105; Mean = 44.0; SD ± 5.7) (Ribeiro et al, 2015).
Leposternon octostegum	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A species of Leposternon with an enlarged, polygonal azygous shield atop the head, which, however, does not exclude the discrete prefrontals, oculars and first temporals shields of the dorsal cephalic area posterior to the rostronasal; one large supralabial and one large infralabial shield on each side of mouth; a large mental shield (postmental shield absent, probably fused with the mental shield); 353–382 ventral, postpectoral halfannuli (Barros-Filho et al. 2019).DEFINITION: A slender, medium-sized (388mm maximum adult total length) form of Leposternon, with an enlarged, polygonal azygous shield atop the head; in dorsal view, the rostronasal, the prefrontals, the oculars, the first temporals and a small pair of occipitals are also clearly discernible; one large supralabial and one large infralabial; mental and postmental shields, probably fused; three pairs of enlarged shields along the midline, with left and right asymmetries: the anterior pair forms a rough stretched pentagon pointing backwards, the second pair has irregular polygons tending to a medial suture in an “X” disposition and the posterior pair showing polygonal transversely elongated shields, larger caudad than rostrad; 353–382 ventral, 357–397 dorsal postpectoral half-annuli; 24–33 dorsal half-annuli scales; 23–29 ventral half-annuli scales; 12–15 caudal annuli; a short, cylindrical and round ending tail; 121–142 precloacal vertebrae; absent precloacal pores and autotomy. Living specimens have a pale grizzled background coloration, with none or inconspicuous sparse, diminute and irregularly distributed dorsal brownish pigments, more concentrated in the second half of the body (Image 23A). Alcohol preserved specimens display a more pale brown (beige) brownish or whitish background coloration, and the pigments are more subtle. The sample from Municipality of Camaçari exhibited a different coloration, with marked brownish blotches or dorsal pigment dots evident along most of the body and in the tail (Barros-Filho et al. 2019).
Leposternon polystegum	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description (grayii): “Head rather short, broad; the vertebral plate hexagonal, elongate, as long as broad; the frontal plate very short and broad the parietal shields oblique; the occipital much longer than broad; temporal shields larger on the side of the occipital; plates of the sternal disk symmetrical, in oblique diverging lines.” (Gray 1865)Description: “The two specimens of group four from Bahia are separated out by their very high postpectoral counts and distinct head pattern. Their head segmentation (figs. 9, 12) is characterized by a narrowing and elongation of the frontals, which anteriorly enclose a very small azygous, and reduction in size of the prefrontals, as well as the occurrence of a small pair of first supralabials and of a pair of small first infralabials. There is a sharp groove or bend at the junction of the rostronasal with the more posterior head shields. The rostronasal, but not the more posterior head shields, is almost always keratinized. Equivalent head patterns are also shown by group three from Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Norte, by group two from Pará (fig. 13), and by eight specimens lacking any locality data (including one specimen attributed to the mouth of the Rio Negro, Argentina). These specimens also show high postpectoral counts, although the counts have an extensive range (R=80). The relatively high (122-141) counts of body vertebrae have a significantly lower range (R =19). All specimens of this sample have the pectoral region filled with enlarged segments (of reduced number) that are never elongate and are arranged in rows of anteriorly open chevrons (fig. 9). All specimens, furthermore, have from zero to eight more dorsal than ventral segments per annulus, and show a faint but definite precloacal pore on each side of the precloacal shield.” (Gans 1971: 406)VARIATION: “There is considerable variability in the shape and arrangement of the segments along the posterior junction of the rostronasal. The two prefrontal may fuse completely or in part with the azygous or alternately with the pair of segments immediately posterior to them. The azygous may contact the rostronasal and its size varies by a factor of four. All but one of the specimens from Rio Grande do Norte and Pernambuco have the azygous in broad contact with the rostronasal; in specimens from Pará and Bahia there may be point contact but the rostronasal is more commonly excluded by contact between the prefrontals. Although the postpectoral counts of these specimens are always high (R=244-324, m= 278), three seemingly non-overlapping, geographically separated groups are noted (fig. 14). Thus, the Rio Grande do Norte specimens have low (R=244-250, m=247) counts of postpectoral annuli, those from Pernambuco have intermediate (R=268-282, m=275) counts, and those from Bahia have high (R=306-324, m=315) counts. Unfortunately, postpectoral counts are lacking for the three specimens from Pará; one specimen is damaged and the counts for the other two were recorded together with those of anterior laterals. Yet, it would appear that Pará specimens are in the high range as the available counts are very high. What is interesting is that the numbers of body vertebrae reflect the same pattern much more faintly. The variation is thus in the number of dermal annuli per vertebra, rather than in the vertebral number per se. Specimens with no locality span the composite range of postpectoral annuli (R =253297, m=277).Data for numbers of dorsal postpectorals and, to a lesser extent, of segments per annulus also show geographical variation. Unfaded specimens have the pigment evenly distributed over segments of the dorsal and lateral aspects and pigmentation often extends to the dorsal head segments.The present samples are apparently drawn from a single species that shows considerable geographic variation in meristic characters. It is also possible that the several areas are each inhabited by closely similar, yet replacing species, but such a hypothesis cannot be tested with the present disjunctly distributed samples.” (Gans 1971: 406)
Leposternon scutigerum	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	IDENTIFICATION: Based in Key to the species of the genus Leposternon presented by Ribeiro et al. (2015), L. scutigerum can be identified by following characteristics: pores absent; pectoral shields large and almost as long as wide; supraocular shields absent, azygous and frontals not distinct, probably fused; 259-295 (n = 5; Mean = 270.2; SD ± 14.2) dorsal and 250-278 (n = 5; Mean = 261.6; SD ± 11.5) ventral postpectoral half-annuli; 2/2 supralabials; 1/1 infralabials; prefrontals, azygous, frontal, parietal, supraocular and temporal not distinct, probably fused (dorsal portion of head with rostronasal and a unique and distinct shield) (Ribeiro et al. 2015). The specimens initially classified as Rio-high show the most strikingly distinct head and pectoral pattern, are easiest to recognize, and consequently are discussed first. Their head segmentation (figs. 3B, 9) is unique in having the cephalic area covered with only two very much enlarged and almost always keratinized shields. (A single row of much smaller and non-keratinized segments fringes the occipital region) Gans (1971).
Leposternon wuchereri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	IDENTIFICATION: Based in Key to the species of the genus Leposternon presented by Ribeiro et al. (2015), L. wuchereri can be identified by following characteristics: Precloacals pores absent; supraocular shields present, azygous shield distinct of the frontal shields; 2/2 supralabials; 2/2 infralabials; parietals not distinct, probably fused with frontals; prefrontals representing less than 27% of head length [20.9–26.1% (n = 3; Mean = 23.0; SD ± 2.7)]; azygous relatively large, representing more than 58% of head width [59.0–67.4% (n = 4; Mean = 63.0; SD ± 4.3)]. (Ribeiro et al. 2015)
Loveridgea ionidesii	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Species of Loveridgea with eye apparent externally through a discrete ocular; frontals fused medially to form a V-shaped azygous shield; slightly less than three supralabials and three infralabials; first postsupralabial fused with postocular, second enormous and in medial contact with parietal, and third narrow; first postinfralabial narrow, in medial contact with enormous malar; two rows of postgenials, two to three segments in the first row, four irregularly (3-5) in the second; eight (7-10) postmalars; no occipitals; body annuli 232-257; caudal annuli 20-26; four round precloacal pores; autotomy site at the 8th to 11th caudal annulus (10-20% autotomized and healed); 12-16 dorsal and 14-18 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; medium size (79-184 mm body length).  (Gans & Kraklau 1989)FIGURES: Figures 9 and 10 show views of head, figure 4C segment proportions as well as pattern at midbody, figure 5C lateral view of tail and caudal region, figure 6C ventral surface of cloacal region, figures 18 and 19 body proportions, and figure 20 distribution of characters. (Gans & Kraklau 1989)DESCRIPTION: Loveridgea ionidesii is a small to medium-size species. The syntypes are faded to a uniform pale brown. More recently collected specimens show an even brown dorsal color with the center of each segment very slightly more densely colored. Anteriorly, the pigmentation is rather dense on the parietals, less so on the temporals and sometimes the back of the frontals. The more anterior segments occasionally show a blotchy pattern. The anterior and posterior ends of the trunk are more densely pigmented than the middle of the trunk; particularly the distal cap of autotomized and healed caudal tips is very dark. Laterally on the trunk, the color fades. Pigmented segments drop out in a checkerboard pattern, about one row of segments dorsal to the lateral sulcus, although some specimens have much of the venter pigmented. The segments on the underside of the tail generally are pigmented, although more lightly than those on the dorsal surface; segments of the lateroventral (not medioventral) edges of the tail tend to be colorless, producing a checkerboard pattern. (The ventral caudal surface is occasionally unpigmented.) Some postcloacals may be densely pigmented, others not. The autotomy annulus and the adjacent annuli are densely pigmented. The rounded snout is prognathous and the head shields are not differentially keratinized. The rostral shield is invisible in dorsal view. Four pairs of enlarged shields, namely the nasals, prefrontals, (fused) frontals, and parietals cover the dorsal surface of the head. The nasals are always in broad contact along the dorsal midline and, along with the rostral, form the tip of the snout. Dorsoposteriorly, each nasal abuts one of the paired prefrontals. The shorter frontals are medially fused to produce a single V-shaped shield. The subtriangular parietals form the posteriormost enlarged pair; their narrow and extended posterior tips lie at the level of the first body annulus. Posteriorly, they abut the medial pair of rectangular segments of the second body annulus (occipitals?); the next lateral segments of this annulus are significantly enlarged. The first supralabial is elongate and dorsally makes point contact with the nasal and prefrontal; the second supralabial is taller, contacts the prefrontal, frontal (in point contact), and triangular ocular, through which the eye is visible. The third supralabial is higher than long and dorsally abuts the parietal. The posterior tip of the third supralabial may extend slightly beyond the angulus oris which corresponds to the posterior suture of the third infralabial. However, the suture between the postsupralabial and post-infralabial shields is deeper than that between other cephalic shields. The oculars are distinct, but there are no postoculars. The enormous postsupralabial dorsally abuts the parietal shields; all of these form the dorsal portion of the first body annulus. The rostral is broadly visible in ventral view. The deep lower jaw is partially inset into the ventral surface of the snout. In ventral view, the mental starts as wide as the rostral portion of the labial edge, but slims down posteriorly to contact the anterior edge of the narrower shield-shaped postmental. The mental is flanked by smaller first infralabials. The postmental is flanked by first infralabials and much larger second ones. It has only point contact with the enormous malars. The third infralabial is narrowly rectangular and the single postinfralabial is smaller. The small postgenial segments of the first row number 2 (to 3), there are generally 3 (3-5) in the second and occasionally a third row with 4 to 5. Rarely are one or both lateral segments of the first row continuous with the second. However, the medial segment of the first row may extend to lie between the first and second rows. The "postmalar" row comprises generally 8, rarely 7 to 10 segments; they and the postinfralabials form the ventral portion of the first body annulus. The ventral portions of the second to fifth body annuli are narrowed. Fewer than 1 percent of the specimens show ventral interruptons forming intercalated dorsal half-annuli in the anterior quarter of the trunk. The dorsal portion of the second through sixth body annuli is very slightly longer than the lateral and ventral ones. Pectoral scales are not otherwise differentiated; the more posterior interannular sutures cross the ventral surface at close to right angles to the long axis. Specimens have 232 to 257 body annuli, from the first segments posterior to the angulus oris up to and including the pore-bearing precloacal row. One or very rarely two intercalations or fusions, sometimes involving a spiral displacement, occur just anterior to the cloaca of most specimens. At midbody an annulus contains 12 to 16 dorsal segments, generally slightly longer than wide, and 14 to 18 ventral ones, the medial about twice as wide as long. The cloacal region corresponds to three to four lateral annuli. The tail bears 20 to 26 caudal annuli, the last being partly incorporated into a narrow and vertically oval caudal tip. The variably expressed autotomy site (at which half the observed tails were broken and at least partially healed) falls between the 8th and 11th caudal annulus. There are four generally substantial round to suboval precloacal pores (rarely pore scars, lacking cores), each inset into the posterior edge of one of the median segments of the last body annulus. (As far as could be checked the pores of sexually mature males always had a 50% larger diameter than those of females, and all pore scars occurred on females.) The elongate precloacal shield consists of two wide median plus two to six narrower flanking segments (total 4-8). The narrow postcloacal edge is formed of 10 to 16 segments.The head is pointed and vertically oval in the preocular region, becoming of rounded cross section thereafter. The nuchal region barely narrows. Past it the trunk increases in diameter and has a generally round, slightly oval horizontal, cross section. The trunk is generally horizontally oval; however, it becomes slightly higher than wide just anterior to the cloacal region and the tail is slightly compressed vertically. The lateral sulci start at the level of the 45th body annulus and extend down to the level of the cloaca and, at midbody, are filled with some imbricate segments in a gap as wide as the flanking segments which are in turn approximately one-half as wide as the adjacent segments. The middorsal and midventral sulci are indicated only by alignment of intersegmental sutures. (Gans & Kraklau 1989)Description of the Holotype: Rostral moderate, triangular; nasal forming a suture with its fellow behind the rostral: a pair of pre-frontals in contact with first and second upper labials and the ocular; a large azygous frontal: a pair of post-frontals; a pair of small scarcely differentiated parietals; no supra-ocular; no pre-ocular: eye distinct in an ocular shield; three upper labials, third largest and in contact with single large temporal a which is in contact with a post-frontal and five scales posteriorly. Mental moderate, subquadrangular: a large, elongate, heptagonal postmental; three lower labials, first small, second large, third small and elongate ; chin shields 2+1+4, first pair in contact with the second lower labials 244 annuli on the body; 27 on the tail; 26 segments (12+16) in a mid-body annulus, the two median ventral segments an broad as long or scarcely broader than long. Six annals; four pre-anal pores. (Battersby 1950)Variation: This series shows the following variations : the prefrontals are excluded from the first upper labial in 16 and from the ocular in 12 specimens; temporals in contact with three to five scales posteriorly; chin-shields 2+1/2+3-5, the anterior pair in contact with the second lower labials, or separated by a large sublabial (4 completely so, 10 separated on one side only) ; 230-254 annuli on the body ; 23-27 on the tail; 24-30 segments in a mid-body annulus (12-14+14-18), the mean being 28, 73 per cent. of the series examined having 12 dorsal and 85 per cent. having 16 ventral segments. Six anals in 165 specimens, four, five, seven or eight in the remaining 20. Total length, 92-202 mm. In all the specimens examined the tail is noticeably enlarged at a about the 9th to 13th annulus and very fragile at that point. Eight have unhealed shortened tails and fifteen have shortened but completely healed tails. (Battersby 1950)
Loveridgea phylofiniens	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (genus): Generally small and slendersize amphisbaenian (snout-vent length of adults between 150 and 200 mm) with trunk rounded and long, conical noncompressed head covered with four pairs of enlarged shields, namely nasals, prefrontals, frontals, and parietals (the third, frontal, pair may be medially fused); rostral shield invisible in dorsal view; oculars discrete or fused to anterodorsal tip of second supralabial; neither preoculars nor postoculars, but three supralabials and three infralabials; no occipitals; one large postsupralabial which may be divided to form a temporal; both forming dorsal part of the first body annulus. Lower jaw covered with a small mental, a postmental, and three infralabials, followed by a large postinfralabial or a small one with an enormous malar; first row of two to three small segments between infralabials contacts postmental; followed by irregular second row of small postgenial segments; pectoral scales not differentiated, interannular sutures crossing ventral surface at close to right angles to long axis. Lateral sulci present, but dorsal and ventral sulci only indicated by alignment of sutures; four to six oval precloacal pores in both sexes; caudal autotomy site always present; tip of tail usually leading into unsegmented caudal cone.The generic diagnosis (Vanzolini, 1951a, 1951b) includes the following characteristics of the skull: "Snout compressed, strongly bent. The premaxilla forms an anterior vertical keel. Basipterygoid processes and supratemporals absent. Partes posteriores choanarum present sometimes reduced. Quadrate rod-like.Dentition: 7 premaxillary; 4 maxillary; and 6 [actually 7 per Tornier, 1899] mandibular teeth.” (Gans & Kraklau 1989: 13)Definition. Snout compressed, strongly bent. The premaxilla forms an anterior vertical keel. Basipterygoid processes and supratemporal absent. Partes posteriores choanarum present, sometimes reduced. Quadrate rod-like. Dentition 7; 4; 6 [premaxillary, maxillary and mandibular number of teeth]. Four pairs of large shields behind the rostral (one more than in Amphisbaena) (Vanzolini 1951: 114).
Mesobaena huebneri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description (genus): The prognathous snout is highly elongate, as well as pointed and laterally compressed. Enlarged shields cover it for some distance beyond the angulus oris. The nasals are large and elongate, and lie on the sides of the head so that the nostrils open lateroventrally. The prefrontals are large and in point-contact with each other. The rostral is very large and ascends the full height of the face so that its posterior tip contacts or approximates the level of the triangular frontal tip that reaches beyond the interocular line. The bluntly conical tail has a poorly marked autotomy annulus, and shows a doubled vertical keel on its distal surface. There are four precloacal pores, arranged in two pairs. (Gans 1971: 22)DIAGNOSIS: An amphisbaenian with a very elongate, highly domed head and enormous rostral which prevents the nasals and most of the prefrontals from medial contact. The frontals extend significantly beyond the level of the angulus oris. The species has a single, uninterrupted row of four precloacal pores and a poorly marked autotomy constriction. (Gans 1971: 23)DEFINITION: A small to medium-sized amphisbaenian with a very elongate, highly domed head and a laterally compressed prognathous snout that is covered by the rostral. Rostral tip and dorsal aspect of large specimens are markedly keratinized. The rostral is flanked by the nasals and the elongate and very large prefrontals on each side keeping the latter from more than point contact on the midline. The nostrils face lateroventrally. There are (ordinarily) three supralabials and three infralabials, the last in each case extending significantly beyond the angulus oris. The frontals are paired and triangular, their posterior tip reaching beyond the level of the angulus oris; the oculars are large, and there is a single even larger temporal on each side. The mental is twice as long as the postmental, and the second infralabial is the largest segment on the chin. There are three postgenial rows. Four, small, round precloacal pores lie in an interrupted row on the anterolateral corners of each segment of two pairs, that are positioned just anterior to the wings of the precloacal shields. The bluntly conical tail has a poorly marked autotomy annulus at the sixth caudal annulus and terminates in an unsegmented, produced, doubled vertical keel. There are 259 to 283 body annuli; 17 to 19 caudal annuli; and 12 to 14 dorsal and 12 to 15 ventral segments to a midbody annulus. Ventral sulci are absent but the dorsal and lateral sulci are clearly marked. The dorsal segments bear sharply defined, very dark spots that extend ventrad to the level of the lateral line, except that the head is clear and the ventral surface of the tail is also pigmented. (Gans 1971: 23)GEOGRAPHICAL VARIATION: The sample is hardly adequate to justify consideration of this topic. Yet the three localities exhibit a decreasing cline in number of body annuli going from west to east. The three specimens from Colombia furthermore show one or two segments divided off the posterior aspect of the two third labials so that variably long third supralabials and infralabials are connected by two or three discrete segments rather than four as in both specimens from Venezuela. Finally, the Venezuelan specimens have the lateral segments of the second postgenial row very elongated to extend parallel to the first row. (Gans 1971: 24)Detailed description: Gans 1971: 24Original description: “Rostrale sehr groß, vorne stark gekrümmt, mit einer stumpfen Schneide auf der Mittellinie; es erstreckt sich sehr weit nach hinten und bildet dort einen spitzen Winkel, der bis über die Augen reicht. Nasenlöcher in mäßig großen Nasalia, die sich in je einem seitlichen Einschnitt des Rostrale befinden, wie bei Anopsibaena king BELL, Hinten stößt das Nasale an das große Praefrontale und das erste Supralabiale, berührt aber auch in einem Punkt das zweite Supralabiale. Die beiden langgestreckten Praefrontalia berühren sich ebenfalls in einem Punkte. Oculare rhombisch; in seinem vorderen Winkel schimmert das Auge hindurch. Kein Praeoculare. Frontalia paarig; sie bilden miteinander eine lange Naht. Hinten stoßen sie an den ersten Körperring. Keine Nacken- oder Kehlfalte. Zwischen dem ersten Körperring, dem Frontale, dem Oculare und dem letzten Supralabiale zwei (rechts) oder drei (links) Schildchen: ein großes oberes (Postoculare) und ein bzw. zwei kleinere untere, die wohl als Temporalia zu bezeichnen sind. 3 Supralabialia, von denen das 2. am größten. 3 Sublabialia, von denen ebenfalls das 2. am größten. Mentale viereckig, dahinter ein kleines dreieckiges Kinnschildchen. Keine Praemaxillarzähne; jederseits 4 Maxillarzähne. Genaue Zahl der Mandibularzähne leider nicht mehr festzustellen, da die Mundöffnung etwas beschädigt ist. Auf der Brust sind die Schildchen nicht besonders differenziert, die Körperringe steen in deutlichen Querreihen. Die Structur der Pectoralregion erinnert jedoch etwas an die Abbildung von Cadea blanoides STEJNEGER in BOULENGER'S. Eidechsenkatalog (II, Taf. XXIII, 3c, 1885; „Amphisbaena punctata”); die Schildchen der ersten 5 Körperringe sind auf der Ventralseite etwas kleiner als auf der Dorsalseite; außerdem bilden sie dort keine so regelmäßigen Vierecke wie auf dem Rücken und der übrigen Bauchseite. 283 Körperringe, 6 Analringe und 19 Schwanzringe. In jedem Körperring 12 dorsale und 14 ventrale Schildchen. Dorsale Schildchen länger als breit, ventrale quadratisch oder etwas breiter als lang. Links 1, rechts 2 Praeanalporen. Oberseite gelblichweiß; jedes Dorsalschildchen mit einem braunen Mittelfleck. Unterseite einfarbig weiß.Gesamtlänge: 270 mm; Schwanzlänge: 18 mm; Körperdurchmesser: 6 mm.” (Mertens 1925)
Monopeltis adercae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description: “Deux grandes plaques sur le dessus de la tète. l'antérieure à peine plus courte que la postériéure; museau à contour horizontal arrondi: rostrale environ 2 fois plus large que haute, séparant largement les nasales: nasales très allongées, n'atteignant pas l'oculaire; une préoculaire un peu plus grande que l'oculaire: oculaire assez grande et suivie dune grande postoculaire; 3 labiales supérieures, la 2° la plus longue, environ 2 ½ fois aussi longue que la 1re el en contact avec l’oculaire, la 3° plus haute et bordant loculaire; 4 occipitales, les deux médianes beaucoup plus petites que les externes; symphysiale plus grande que les labiales adjacentes, suivie l'une grande mentonnière hexagonale, elle-mème suivie de 4 plaques, les externes étant les plus longues el plus larges que les internes; 3 labiales inférieures, la 3° énorme. Queue longue, arrondie à l'extrémité; 289 anneaux sur le corps, 51 sur la queue; un anneau au milieu du tronc comprend 47 segments (29 dorsaux et 18 ventraux); les 2 segments ventraux médians environ 2 fois aussi larges que longs; 6 grandes plaques pectorales allongées, les 2 externes plus courtes que les médianes el complètement divisées; 6 segments préanaux; pas de pores préanaux.” (Witte 1954: 1006)
Monopeltis anchietae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior much longer than the posterior; a pair of occipitals; no preocular; ocular small, eye indistinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, not bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, not reaching the ocular; 3 upper labials, third largest; mental small; postmental large, very variable, subhexagonal, flanked on either side by a small scale (anchietae), or transversely elongate and in contact with the first and second lower labial (Iconhardi); 2-4 chin shields, outer in contact with second and third, or only third, or separated from all 3 lower labials as in the type of anchietae; '182-222 annuli on body, 7-12 on tail (7 fide FitzSimons, 1938, p. 194); 36-46 (20-26 + 16-20) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median segments broader than long; 4-6 pectorals; 4-5 anals; 0-0 or 1-1 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 410)Measurements. Total length 284 (271 + 13) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 410)
Monopeltis capensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description (genus): Head depressed, snout projecting, sharp-edged; nostril inferior, pierced in a usually-elongate nasal; a gular fold; no vertebral line, a lateral line, no ventral line; pectoral segments enlarged but subject to subdivision; preanal pores present or absent; tail cylindrical, obtuse. Teeth anchylosed to the sides of the jaws.Note: Loveridge 1941: 406 expressed “considerable difficulty in devising a synopsis which would reflect taxonomic and geographical relationships. In view of the fact that the majority of species are still only known from the types makes it essential that considerable caution should be exercised in using the synopsis” he provided.Diagnosis. A derived species of the M. capensis complex. distinguished by the complete absence of pigmentation, usually an entire dorsal head shield with lateral notches (some have blind lateral sutures. but only one has a divided head shield) and usually two or three anterior postgenials (usually four in all other species). (Broadley 1997)Description. Broadley et al. (1976: 385) for Group A, also Table 1 in Broadley 1997.
Monopeltis galeata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior equal to, or shorter than, the posterior; a pair of occipitals; preocular present or absent; ocular moderate or small, eye indistinguishable; rostral undirided, grooved anteriorly, separating the nasals, bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, not reaching the preocular (when present); 3 (not 5) upper labials, third largest; mental moderate; postmental large, subcordiform, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 5 chin shields, outer in contact with the second and third lower labials; 195-229 annuli on the body, 17-22 on tail; 16-18 (9-10 + 7-8) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two and a half times as broad as long; 4 pectorals; 6 anals; 0-0, 1-1, or 2-2 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 417)Dentition. Premaxillary teeth 2-2 or 3-3; maxillaries 3-3 or 4-4; mandibulars 5-5 or 6-6. (Based on recounts kindly furnished by Dr. E. R. Dunn). (Loveridge 1941: 417) Coloration. Above and below, uniformly white except for some plumbeous pigmentation which forms an irregular vertebral line on the posterior two-thirds of the dorsum and tail, while on the latter it extends round in large blotches to the lower surface. (Loveridge 1941: 417)Measurements. Total length 501 (466 + 35) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 417)
Monopeltis guentheri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. One or two large shields covering the head, if two then the anterior much shorter than the posterior; a pair of occipitals; a supraocular present or absent; a preocular present (boulengeri) or absent (guentheri); ocular small, eye indistinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, not or only just bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, reaching or not reaching the preocular (when present); 3 upper labials, second small, third largest; mental small; postmental large, heptagonal, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 4 chin shields, outer in contact with the second and third lower labials; 246-254 annuli on body, 25-28 on tail; 28-38 (16-22 + 12-16) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments much broader than long; 4-6 pectorals; 6-8 anals; 3-3 or 4-4 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 419)Dentition. Premaxillary tooth 1; maxillaries 2-2; mandibulars 6-6. (Loveridge 1941: 419)Measurements. Total length 308 (275 + 33) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 419)
Monopeltis infuscata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A plesiomorphic sibling species of M. capensis, from which it is distinguished by its extensive dark dorsal pigmentation and the presence of a transverse division of the large dorsal head shield in juveniles, which persists as a pair of blind lateral clefts in nearly half of the adult specimens. There are usually four postgenials in the first row rather than two or three as in M. capensis. (Broadley 1997).Description. (paratype variations in parentheses). A medium-sized species measuring 255 + 13 mm (snout-vent length 90 to 280 mm). Pigmentation consists of a few dark patches anterior to the 50th body annulus, thereafter the entire dorsal surface is grey-brown above the lateral sulci, becoming darker on the tail, but patchy on the caudal tip (pigmentation may be very reduced or absent on the anterior quarter of the body, pigmentation rarely extends ventral to the lateral sulci, but may cover the mid-ventral segments of the tail). The large dorsal head shield has very short blind sutures extending diagonally forward from the oculars, fitting into notches on the edges of the shield, which in profile is feebly convex posteriorly and slightly concave anteriorly (two discrete azygous dorsal head shields in some juveniles, these gradually fuse in adults, but many retain short lateral sutures). The elongate ocular shield is slightly convex (the eye may be visible as a black spot) and is in contact anteriorly with the second supralabial and posteriorly with the parietals (there may be a small triangular subocular); a row of four (4 to 6) parietals separates the large head shield from the first body annulus. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and pierced in moderate nasal scales, which are separated from the oculars, the lip (sometimes in short contact), and each other. Three supralabials (very rarely 2 or 4), the third by far the largest. The lower jaw is formed by a subrectangular mental, three infralabials, the third enormous, and large shield-shaped postmental or genial (occasionally longitudinally bisected), followed by four (2 to 5) anterior and six (5 to 10) small posterior postgenials. The modified pectoral region extends to the ninth (8th to 10th) dorsal annulus; there are five (usually six) elongate pectorals, the medial pair narrowing anteriorly and projecting slightly forward, so that the midventral segments of the prepectoral annulus curve around them (the outer pair of pectorals may be more or less broken up into the four or five constituant segments. or may be partially fused with the adjoining pectorals). There are 203 (179 to 209) body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to the precloacal shields. There are 18 (+ to 27) supernumerary dorsal half-annuli corresponding to the first 50 body annuli (there may be one or two additional half-annuli in the precloacal region). A midbody annulus has 23-25 (19 to 32) dorsal and 23-25 (18 to 27) ventral segments, the middorsal segments are approximately three to four times as long as wide and the midventral segments are square (one and a half times as long as wide to one and a half times as wide as long). The number of dorsal segments is subequal to (or only slightly greater than) the number of ventral segments. The lateral sulci are distinct, but there are no dorsal or ventral sulci. There are numerous diagonal folding lines on the dorsal surface of the body. There are four (3 to 6) lateral annuli, the first one contacting the two enlarged medial precloacal shields (the terminal segments usually bearing one (rarely 2) precloacal pore). The short tail is smoothly rounded and appears subcylindrical in cross section. There are nine (6 to 11) caudal annuli, with no autotomy. The caudal cap is covered with irregular segments. (Broadley 1997).Variation in western populations. The western populations of M. infuscata do not differ significantly from the type series (Table 1), but apparently attain a larger size, the maximum being 340 + 16 mm (TMP 29815, Alheit, Northern Cape Province). (Broadley 1997).
Monopeltis jugularis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior equal to or slightly longer than the posterior; a pair of occipitals; preocular present (koppenfelsii) or absent (jugularis, semipunctata); ocular small, eye distinct or hidden; rostral separating the nasals, bordering the nostrils; nasal elongate, not reaching the preocular (when present); 3 upper labials, third largest; mental small; post- mental large, subcordiform, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 4 chin shields, outer in contact with the second and third lower labials; 206-215 annuli on body, 13-17 on tail; 30-36 (16-19 + 14-18) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two to two and a half times as broad as long; pectorals broken up into large and small shields; 4-6 anals; 0-0 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 416)Coloration. Above, brownish yellow anteriorly owing to a dark brown spot on each segment, posteriorly pale yellow; below yellowish. (Loveridge 1941: 416) Measurements. Total length 670 (640 + 30) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 416)
Monopeltis kabindae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: “Une seule grande plaque sur le dessus de la tête; museau à contour horizontal arrondi; rostrale à peine plus large que haute, séparant largement les nasales; nasales très allongées; pas de préoculaire; pas d'ocu laire; œil complètement caché; 4 labiales supérieures, la 3€ la plus haute et 1.5 fois plus longue que la 2e; symphysiale plus grande que les labiales adjacentes, suivie d'une grande mentonnière hexagonale, elle même bordée de deux plaques allongées et suivie de 3 petites plaques; 3 labiales inférieures, la 3e énorme. Queue courte, renflée, arrondie à l'extrémité. 218 anneaux sur le corps, 12 sur la queue. Un anneau au milieu du corps renferme 21 segments dorsaux, et 12 ventraux; les 2 segments ventraux médians 2 fois aussi larges que longs; 6 grandes plaques pectorales, les externes plus courtes que les autres, les médianes s'élargissant graduellement vers l'arrière; 4 segments préanaux; pas de pores préanaux. Complètement incolore.” (Witte & Laurent 1942)
Monopeltis leonhardi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A medium-sized (200 to 290 mm. snout-vent length in adults) species of Monopeltis with the dorsal surface heavily pigmented from nape to tail tip and this coloration extending below the lateral sulcus. The species has 170 to 213 body, three or four (rarely five to seven) lateral, and five to nine caudal annuli (up to the bluntly rounded tip), 17 to 34 dorsal plus 14 to 27 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and two to four (usually four) first and three to 11 second postgenial segments. The azygous head shields are paired, the ocular being wedged between them. There are no preoculars. The nasals are short and do not contact the oculars, the lip, or each other. There are four to seven (usually six) parietal shields. The pectoral zone is rectangular and the sutures between the six (very rarely four) shields are parallel. They correspond to four dorsal body annuli, except when the lateral ones are broken up. The ventral segments of the prepectoral annulus are slightly enlarged but not involved in the pectoral shields. The lateral sulci are clearly expressed, but neither dorsal nor ventral sulci are obvious. Diagonal folding lines occur. There are two to 22 supernumerary dorsal half-annuli, most of these corresponding to the first 50 body annuli. The dorsal interannular sutures cross the body at right angles to its long axis. There are no precloacal pores. No autotomy occurs.Description. This is a medium-sized species of Monopeltis with the available specimens ranging from 90 to 290 mm. in snout-vent length (fig. 20). The dorsal surface from nuchal region to tail tip is heavily pigmented grayish or reddish brown, the pigmentation extends for two or three segments ventral to the lateral sulcus and a little farther along the interannular sutures. There are often extensive areas of pigmentation on the large azygous head shields, but the midventral surface is unpigmented. The areas of densest pigmentation tend to be the nuchal region and the dorsal surface of the tail. Juveniles are less strongly pigmented. The dorsal surface of the head is divided into two azygous shields. The dorsal region of the anterior head shield is slightly concave and that of the posterior shield is convex. The eye is usually visible as a dark spot beneath the lozenge-shaped ocular, which usually makes contact with the second supralabial and is bordered posteriorly by a small postocular. A series of four to seven (usually six) parietal shields links the third supralabials and separates the posterior azygous head shield from the first body annulus. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and inserted in relatively short nasal scales, which are well separated from the oculars, the lip, and each other. There are three supralabials, the third by far the largest. The lower jaw is formed by a somewhat squarish mental, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials, and the enlarged shield-shaped postmental (genial). Posterior to the postmental are two (rarely one) pairs of first postgenials; the medial pair are in contact (sometimes fused) behind the postmental, the lateral pair are in contact with the second infralabials. Immediately caudad to the first row of postgenials is a second row of three to 11 postgenial segments; the larger medial ones border the first postgenials, and the tiny lateral ones border the third infralabial posteriorly. The modified pectoral region extends to the seventh through the eleventh dorsal annulus; there are usually six elongate rectangular pectoral shields (the lateral pair may be more or less broken up); these correspond to four dorsal halfannuli. The midventral segments of the prepectoral annulus are slightly enlarged, but are not involved with the pectoral shields. There are 170 to 213 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. There are two to 22 supernumerary dorsal half-annuli. Most of these correspond to the first 50 body annuli, although there is usually one extra half-annulus in the precloacal region. A midbody annulus has 17 to 34 dorsal plus 14 to 27 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately three times as long as wide and the mid-ventral segments three times as wide as long. The number of dorsal segments is consistently greater than the number of ventral segments for any given specimen. There are generally three or four (rarely five to seven) lateral annuli, the first one or two in contact with the outer of two or three pairs of enlarged precloacal shields. There are no pre-cloacal pores. The short subcylindrical tail is smoothly rounded. There are five to nine caudal annuli, with no autotomy. The caudal cap iS covered with somewhat irregular segments. The lateral sulci are well marked, but there are no dorsal or ventral sulci. There are diagonal folding lines on the dorsal surface of the body. (Broadley et al. 1976: 381)
Monopeltis luandae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Gans 1976: 3 Description: Gans 1976: 3Diagnosis. A small to medium-sized (203 to 385 mm. snout-vent length) species of Monopeltis with the (apparently faded) dorsal surface of the trunk and tail speckled with dark pigment that fuses into an accentuated area on the dorsal surface of the tail. The species has 223 to 227 body and 15 or 16 caudal annuli (up to the oval tip that shows some lateral compression), 29 to 36 (generally 30 or 32) dorsal and 14 to 20 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and four first plus five to eight second postgenial segments. The azygous head shields are discrete at 218 mm. snout-vent length, and show broad isthmus of keratin at 385 mm., but with significant lateral notches in the heavily keratinized shield. There are no preoculars. The posterior processes of the nasals (which segments neither touch each other nor the lip) are excluded from contact with the ocular by a wide contact zone between third supralabial and head shield. The pectoral region is wide and very short. The medial pair of shields is by far the largest. They are widest posteriorly and are joined anteriorly by a second and smaller medial pair (derivative of the first pectoral annulus) that widens anteriorly, with three to five pairs of much smaller shields clustering around the junction. One of the two of these may be replaced by roughly parallel-sided lateral pair flanking the medial shields along their length. The lateral sulci are poorly expressed and the dorsal ones are absent. Both zones show major and crossing diagonal folding lines. Supernumerary dorsal half-annuli number 14 to 19 in the first 50 (14 to 24 in the first 100) body annuli and very few thereafter. The dorsal interannular sutures cross the trunk at right angles to its long axis. There are no precloacal pores. Autotomy occurs at the third to fourth caudal annulus. (Broadley et al. 1976)Description. This is a relatively stout, small to medium-sized species of Monopeltis with the available specimens ranging from 203 to 385 mm. in snout-vent length (fig. 20). Most specimens are badly faded, but parts of USNM 20037 still show definite speckling of melanophores in a middorsal band that starts in the anterior third of the body, extends onto the base of the tail and descends to the level of the lateral sulcus. The dorsal surface of the head is covered by two heavily keratinized azygous head shields in smaller specimens (less than 208 mm. snout-vent). The medial third of the intermediate raphe has fused in larger specimens (greater than 350 mm.), with a heavy build-up of keratin on the anteromedial portion of the anterior and the center of the posterior shield. The medial line of the anterior shield is straight and that of the posterior shield convex; laterally there is a marked convexity anterior to the ocular on each side, providing an anterior exposure for the eye. The eye is clearly visible as a dark spot beneath the quadrilateral ocular in the smaller specimens; only in the largest one is it obscured. The ocular is in contact anteriorly with the first azygous shield, dorsally with the second, ventrally with the third supralabial, and posteriorly with the second of five or six parietal segments. These segments link the third and fourth supralabials on each side and separate the posterior azygous head shields from the segments of the first body annulus. The crescent-shaped nostrils are inserted in medium-sized nasal segments that are well separated from the oculars, the lip, and each other. There are three or four supralabials, the first very small, the second narrow but elongate, and the third (and sometimes fourth) narrow and variably spaced. (The last two, jointly with the most lateral parietal, occupy the space taken by the enlarged third supralabial in other spade-snouted species.) The lower jaw is covered by the squarish mental with flaring anterior edges and the anteriorly concave posterior edge, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials, and the large, heart-shaped postmental (genial) which is in broad contact with the first and second infralabials. The rectangular lateral segments of the first post-genial row contact the second infralabials and postmental; the subquadrangular medial first postgenials have broad contact behind the postmental. A row of five to eight smaller second postgenials follows behind these and the third infralabials just anterior to the deep gular fold. The modified pectoral region extends to the ninth body annulus. The pectoral arrangement involves wedge-shaped, rather than parallel shields. Generally there is a medial pair, much the widest posteriorly, flanked by one or two often shorter sets of enlarged shields on each side. The lateral ones tend to be short and may be broken into one or three separate elements. The set coresponds to four or five body annuli, whereas the one or two more anterior annuli are much widened medially and definitely involved in the formation of the pectoral zone. A pair of medial derivatives of these anterior annuli forms an anterior prolongation of the pectoral shield pattern. There are 223 to 227 body annuli from the posterior edge of the last infralabial up to (but not including) the cloacal shields. Those corresponding to the gular region generally have the dorsal interannular raphes widened and filled with tiny segments, equivalent to but less pronounced than those filling the deep gular folds. There are 14 to 19 supernumerary dorsal half-annuli in the first 50 (14 to 24 in the first 100) body annuli and very few thereafter. A midbody annulus has 29 to 36 (generally 30 or 32) dorsal plus 14 to 20 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately three times as long as wide and the midventral segments one and one-half times as wide as long. The number of dorsal segments is consistently greater than the number of ventrals. There are generally four lateral annuli, the first and/or second in contact with the four segments on the enlarged precloacal shield. There are no precloacal pores. The medium-sized tail is pointed in juveniles and rounded in the larger specimens. There are 15 or 16 caudal annuli, with an autotomy constriction at the third or fourth of these after which the tail tends to be slightly swollen, sometimes increased in dorsoventral dimension and laterally compressed up to the smoothly rounded tip. The shallowly inscribed remnants of annular raphes give this a concentric pattern in distal view. The larger specimens show major damage to parts of the body and tail, with the partial healing covered by geometrically irregular segmentation. The lateral sulci are very narrow and poorly defined; they involve some irregularity and are only one-half as wide as the adjacent segments. The dorsal surface is crossed by many diagonal folding lines, but lacks a dorsal sulcus. The ventral sulcus is only indicated by alignment of intersegmental sutures. (Broadley et al. 1976)
Monopeltis perplexus	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Gans 1976: 6 Description: Gans 1976: 6Diagnosis. A small (215 to 300 mm. snout-vent length in adults), slender species of Monopeltis with the dorsal surface darkened by a speckling of individual melanophores evenly spaced across the segments (mainly after the first third of the body and to just ventral of the lateral sulci, but onto the ventral surface of the tail). The speckles fuse into a darker tone on the anterior part of the dorsal surface of the tail. The species has 261 to 270 body and 22 to 24 caudal annuli (up to the smoothly and parabolically rounded tip), 12 to 17 (generally 16) dorsal and 14 to 16 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, and four postgenial plus five postmalar segments. The azygous head shields are broadly fused and only a short blind suture remains anterior to the ocular at the base of a notch in the heavy keratinous shield. There are no preoculars. The slender posterior processes of the nasals which segments do not contact each other medially, but may touch the lip) are excluded from touching the ocular by a wide contact zone of the third supralabial and the head shield. The pectoral region is relatively short and wide. It is formed of six main shields, partial fusion occurring azygously between the lateral pairs, and the almost triangular medial pair being by far the largest. Sutures radiate from the front and a pair of enlarged segments of the prepectoral annulus inserts lateral to the medial pair. Lateral and mid-dorsal sulci are clearly expressed. Fewer than three supernumerary dorsal half-annuli occur, mainly in the first and second 50 body annuli. The dorsal interannular sutures cross the trunk at right angles to its long axis. There are no precloacal pores. Autotomy occurs at the fifth to seventh caudal annulus. (Broadley et al. 1976)Description. This is a small-sized slender species of Monopeltis with the available adult specimens ranging from 215 to 300 mm. in snout-vent length (fig. 20). The dorsal surface is darkened by a faint speckling of individual melanophores, evenly spaced across the segments. The dorsal pigmentation begins to be seen posterior to the first third of the body and extends just ventral to the lateral sulci. The ventral surface of the tail, particularly the narrowed autotomy annulus, shows faint pigment emphasis. The speckles fuse into a darker tone on the anterior part of the dorsal surface of the tail, but the caudal tip lacks pigment. The dorsal surface of the head is covered by a broadly fused azygous head shield with only short blind sutures extending anteromedially from the level of the ocular. The dorsal region of the anterior portion is slightly concave and the posterior portion is convex. The entire zone iS heavily keratinized, except for a strip along the posterior edge and the concave region immediately anterior to the blind sutures (and the oculars which lie just posterior to these). The eye is faintly (more so in smaller specimens) visible deep beneath the pentagonal ocular, that has a vertical anterior suture, a horizontal one versus the azygous head shield, and a ventral one versus the second and third supralabials, whereas the pointed posterior tip of the ocular lies adjacent to the lateralmost of the five to eight (usually six) parietals that border the posterior edge of the azygous shield between the third supralabials. The row of parietals separates the shield from the first body annulus. The crescent-shaped nostrils are inserted in medium-sized nasals which are well separated from the oculars, the lip and each other. There are three supralabials; the third by far the largest. The lower jaw is covered by a somewhat squarish mental, the first, second, and enormous third infralabials, and the large, shield-shaped postmental (genial) that may or may not have point contact with the first infralabials. Postero-laterally to the postmental lie two pairs of postgenials; the medial pair invariably is in contact posterior to the postmental and sometimes excludes the rectangular lateral pair from contact with the postmental. Rarely are these tiny segments of the gular fold in the position of second postgenial segments. Postmalars are lacking. The modified pectoral region extends to the ninth through the tenth dorsal annulus; there are six elongate and enlarged pectoral shields, though the lateral pairs may show partial fusion. The largest is the medial pair which is almost triangular and much the widest posteriorly where it forms a smooth anteriorly concave curve. The two lateral pairs may have more or less parallel sides and be partially fused. The lateralmost pair contacts four dorsal half-annuli, the next medial pair two additional ones, and a pair of lozenge-shaped shields flank the anterior tip of the medial pair and prolong it into the midventral portion of the fourth body annulus which is very much involved with the pectoral shields. There are 261 to 270 body annuli, from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. Specimens have fewer than three supernumerary dorsal half-annuli, occurring mainly in the first and second 50 body annuli. A midbody annulus generally has 16 dorsal plus 14 to 16 ventral segments. At midbody the middorsal segments are approximately one to one and a-half times as long as wide and the midventral segments are slightly wider than long. The number of dorsal segments is slightly greater than the number of ventral segments for any given specimen. There are generally four to five lateral annuli, the first one to three in contact with the outer of two pairs of enlarged precloacal shields. Precloacal pores are lacking. The elongate subcylindrical tail is smooth and laterally compressed posterior to the autotomy annulus. There are 22 to 24 caudal annuli and autotomy occurs at the fifth to seventh. The caudal cap is covered with regular, somewhat enlarged segments, but the interannular sutures are much more shallow along the distal tip and the dorsomedial zone of the two to three adjacent annuli. The lateral sulci are well marked, being as wide as an adjacent segment. There is a faintly indicated dorsal sulcus, whereas the ventral sulcus is only indicated by alignment of intersegmental sutures. The dorsal surface lacks diagonal folding lines. (Broadley et al. 1976)
Monopeltis remaclei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior much shorter than the posterior; a pair of occipitals; no preocular; ocular small, eye distinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, not reaching the ocular; 3 upper labials, second longest, third highest; mental small; postmental large, pentagonal, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 5 chin shields, outer in contact with the second and third lower labials; 1289 annuli on body, 22 on tail; 42 (26 + 16) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two and a half times as broad as long; 6 pectorals; 4 anals; 0-0 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 412)Measurements. Total length 560 (505 + 55) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 412)
Monopeltis rhodesiana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A derived species of the M. capensis complex, distinguished by the pigmentation restricted to the dorsal surface of the posterior half of the body, becoming heavier on the tail, where it usually extends to the ventral surface. The dorsal head shield rarely shows lateral clefts and the ocular is reduced in size or absent. There are usually not more than 12 supernumerary dorsal half- annuli (usually more in all other species except zambezensis). Usually four anterior postgenials and 4 to 6 posterior (resembling decosteri and zambezensis rather than infuscatus and capensis). (Broadley 1997)Description: See Broadley et al. (1976: 394), also Table 1 in Broadley 1997.
Monopeltis scalper	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior slightly shorter than the posterior; a pair of occipitals; no loreal; no preocular; ocular small, eye distinct; rostral separating the nasals, not quite bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, apparently not reaching the ocular; 3 upper labials, third largest; mental small; postmental large, pentagonal, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 5 chin shields, outer in contact with the second and third lower labials; 234 annuli on body, 18 on tail; 30 (16 + 14) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments much broader than long; 6 pectorals; 4 anals; 1-1 preanal pores. Dentition. Premaxillary tooth 1; maxillaries 3-3; mandibulars 6-6. (Loveridge 1941: 413)Measurements. Total length 319 (290 + 29) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 413)
Monopeltis schoutedeni	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. One large shield covering the head; a pair of occipitals; a preocular; ocular small, eye indistinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, apparently not reaching the ocular; 3 upper labials, second longest, third highest; mental small; postmental large, heptagonal, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 4 chin shields, outer in contact with the second and third lower labials; 276 annuli on body, 29 on tail; 32 (18 + 14) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two and a half times as broad as 6 long; 6 pectorals; 8 anals; 5-5 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 420)Measurements. Total length 350 (311 + 39) mm (Loveridge 1941: 420)
Monopeltis sphenorhynchus	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A small to medium-sized (207 to 326 mm. snout-vent length in adults) slender form of Monopeltis with the dorsal surface immaculate or marked by only a diffuse scattering of melanophores. Specimens have 228 to 284 body (see geographic variation), three to six lateral and seven to 11 (generally nine) caudal annuli (up to the smoothly rounded tip that may show faint lateral compression), 22 to 37 dorsal (see geographical variation) plus 14 to 26 (generally 16, 18, or 20) ventral segments to a midbody annulus and two (rarely three) large segments to the first plus three to seven (generally five) to the second postgenial row. The azygous head shields are discrete in juveniles, but almost completely fused in specimens larger than 130 mm. The strongly keratinized shield of larger specimens lacks any trace of an ocular notch. The nasals do not contact each other or the ocular, from which they are separated by broad contact between the azygous head shield and the second supralabial. They often contact the lip, either anterior to a reduced first supralabial, or by fusion with this (leading to two supralabials). There are six parietal shields. The pectoral region is long and slender. The medial pair of the six slender shields (which correspond dorsally to five body annuli) is longest and extends farthest anteriorly, so that the narrowed last prepectoral annulus makes a short radius curve around the anterior end of the shield. The lateral sulci are poorly expressed and dorsal and ventral ones are absent. There are diagonal folding lines on the dorsum. Many specimens have no supernumerary dorsal half-annuli; there are never more than three and some specimens show a reduction of up to nine half-annuli. The dorsal interannular sutures cross the trunk at right angles to its long axis. Two large precloacal pores lie on the terminal segments of the first lateral annulus, which are in contact with the large median pair of precloacal shields. No autotomy occurs. (Broadley et al. 1976)Description. This is a medium-sized form of Monopeltis with the available specimens from 104 to 326 mm. in snout-vent length (fig. 20). The dorsum is marked by a diffuse sprinkling of melanophores, except for the nuchal region and tail, which is immaculate. The dorsal surface of the head is divided into two discrete azygous head shields in small juveniles. These segments are almost completely fused in specimens that exceed 130 mm. in snout-vent length. In large specimens the strongly keratinized shield lacks any a trace of a lateral suture. The head shield is slightly convex in profile. In juveniles the eye can just be distinguished as a dark spot beneath the lozenge-shaped ocular, which makes contact with the second supralabial. A row of six parietals separates the large head shield from the first body annulus. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and inserted into relatively short nasal scales which often border the lip, but are well separated from the ocular and each other. There are usually three supralabials, but the first may be fused with the nasal. The lower jaw is formed by an almost rectangular mental, first, second (often fused with first), and enormous third infralabials, and a rather small heart-shaped postmental (genial). Posterior to the postmental are a pair (rarely three) of large first postgenials in broad medial contact followed by three to seven (usually five) very small second postgenials. The modified pectoral region extends from the eighth to eleventh dorsal annulus. There are six elongate segments, the medial pair widest posteriorly and projecting anteriorly so that the narrowed prepectoral annulus curves around them. The lateral pair tend to be broken up. There are 228 to 284 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. Supernumerary dorsal half-annuli do not exceed three and in nearly 50 percent of the specimens there is actually a reduction a in the number of dorsal half-annuli, reaching a maximum of nine in USNM 58741. A midbody annulus has 22 to 37 dorsal plus 16 to 26 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately four times longer than wide and the midventral segments are approximately one and a-half times to twice as wide as long. The number of dorsal segments is always much greater than the number of ventral segments for any given specimen. There are three to six lateral half-annuli; the enlarged outer segments of the first half-annulus each bear a precloacal pore and are in contact with the very large medial pair of precloacal shields and also a pair of very small lateral precloacal shields. The very short tail is smoothly rounded and appears subcylindrical in cross section. There are seven to 11 caudal annuli with no autotomy. The segments of the caudal cap tend to be fused. The lateral sulci are very feebly defined and there are no dorsal or ventral sulci. There are numerous diagonal folding lines on the dorsal surface of the body. (Broadley et al. 1976)Description (gazei): “Distinguishable from typical capensis on the following: Large head shield just slightly longer than broad and bordered behind by two pairs of occipitals, of which the inner pair are bandlike and the outer small and quadrangular. A single temporal on each side between the outer occipital and 3rd upper labial, in contact anteriorly with ocular; latter very small and elongate; eye indiscernible; 2nd lower labial not half as large as 1st; mental subpentagonal and followed behind by a pentagonal postmental, which is wedged behind between a single pair of large chin-shields, which are in good contact with all three lower labials on either side; six large. elongate pectorals, median pair equal in length to distance from tip of snout to hinder edge of second annulus on nape, widening considerably behind and there twice anterior width; second pair of pectorals broadest anteriorly, outermost pair divided into several segments of which the longest is from a third to half the length of median pair; 239-264 annuli on body, and 10-11 on tail; each annulus about middle of body made up of 52-54 (i.e. 32 dorsal and 20-22 ventral) segments; the two median rows of ventrals twice as broad as long; a single pair of much enlarged, 5-sided anal plates. Two preanal pores, one on each side in a small scale abutting on to antero-lateral side of enlarged anal plate.” (Fitzsimons 1943: 393)Dimensions (gazei): “Type (T.M. 13342). H. & B. 272.8. tail 13.2, diam. body 7.3 mm.” (Fitzsimons 1943: 394)
Monopeltis vanderysti	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior slightly shorter than the posterior; a pair of occipitals; a loreal in advance of the preocular; ocular small, eye indistinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, not reaching the preocular; 4 upper labials, fourth largest; mental small; postmental large, pentagonal, in contact, even though barely, with all 3 lower labials; 2 chin shields, in contact with the third lower labial; 227-233 annuli on body, 18-19 on tail; 32 (20 + 12) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two and a half times as broad as long; 4-6 pectorals; 4 anals; 0-0 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 414)Measurements. Total length 390 (365 + 25) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 414)
Monopeltis zambezensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A derived slender species of the M. capensis complex, distinguished from all other species by having 216-263 body annuli (176-226 in other species) and less than three, or even negative numbers of supernumerary dorsal half-annuli. The low count of 226 body annuli previously recorded for the paratype NMZB-UM 5528 was too low by about 20, as there is an area of extensive damage just caudad of the pectorals. Pigmentation "consists of grey stipple on the posterior two-thirds of the dorsum, which is usually concentrated along the vertebral line, often appearing as a distinct stripe, tail tip usually solidly pigmented above and below. The dorsal head shield usually shows short blind lateral sutures, especially in eastern material, and there is a slight lateral indentation for the elongate ocular, which is in contact with the second supralabial. Usually four postgenials in the first row and 5 or 6 in the second. Apparently the smallest species in the complex, the maximum recorded snout-vent length being 275 mm (other species attain 290 to 340 mm). (Broadley 1997)Description. “The type series consisted of subadults and juveniles, most specimens obtained subsequently are adults. The only long series consists of 39 specimens from Dande Safari Area, representing an eastern range extension of 115 km. These specimens have low counts for body annuli (214-251, mean = 234.75, SD = 7.30) and 33 have head shields with lateral clefts. The largest (NMZB 14967) measures 265 + 10 mm and has a midbody diameter of 6 mm. Note: Data for the material from Dande Safari Area was obtained too late for inclusion in Figures 2 and 4.” (Broadley 1997)See also Broadley et al. (1976: 398) and Table 1 in Broadley 1997.
Zygaspis ferox	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. The thing that first drew attention to this taxon was its large size and aggressive behaviour. This is reflected in its relatively massive skull, laterally expanded posteriorly and with humps on the fronto-parietal sutures and midway along the well developed saggital crest. It has lower counts of body and caudal annuli than adjacent populations of Z. quadrifrons and it differs from Z. nigra and the Z. violacea group in always having six or seven shields in the temporal region. It differs from Z. kafuensis in lacking a blind nasal sulcus and in having 34-40 segments in a midbody annulus rather than 24-36, Z. dolichomenta has only 28-32. In the latter species the tail represents more than 15% of total length, whereas it is less than 15% in Z. ferox. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Description. (Paratype variations in parentheses) A large species of Zygaspis with discrete preoculars, two (2-4) parietals, two postoculars, two (2-3) temporals, three supralabials and two postsupralabials. Postmental only slightly longer than mental; 2 + 4 (2-6) postgenials; 10 (8-11) postmalars; three infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 194 (193-203), on tail 38 (35-40), with 18 (18-21) dorsal and 16 (16-20) ventral segments in a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the seventh (8th 9th) caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: three specimens (25%) have autotomised tails. There are four precloacal pores on the last body annulus, 6 (rarely 4) precloacal and 8 (10-14) postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 30 (27-36); tail 14.5 (13.0 -14.3) % of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Holotype (largest complete specimen) 220 + 36 mm (diameter 7 mm), exceeded in snout-vent length by NMZB-UM 11338 measuring 247 + 13 mm (tail autotomised). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)CoIouration. Uniform dark brown caudad, paler below. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)
Zygaspis kafuensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. This species differs from all its congeners in having a short blind sulcus extending forward from the rear edge of the nasal towards the nostril. Like Z. ferox, it shows no fusion of head shields in the temporal region, but it differs from that species in having fewer segments a in a midbody annulus (24-36 vs 34-40) and in its more slender build (SVL/diameter ratio 35-40 vs 27-36, while doliochomenta has 25-33). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Description. (Paratype variations in parentheses) A large species of Zygaspis with discrete preoculars, four parietals, two postoculars, three (2-4) temporals, three supralabials and two postsupralabials. Postmental one and half times as long as mental; two postgenials in a single row (2+4 in NMZB-UM 33340, which has a shorter postmental); nine (8-9) postmalars; three infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 207 (198-205), on tail 43 (30), with 16 (12-18) dorsal and 14 (12-18) ventral segments in a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci well defined. A slight constriction following the ninth (6th to 8th) caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: three specimens (60%) have autotomised tails. There are four precloacal pores on the last body annulus, 6 precloacal and 10 (9-12) postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 40 (35-39); tail 14.7 (13.1) % of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Holotype (largest) 220 + 38 mm (diameter 5.5 mm).Colouration. Uniform brown above, ventrum with anterior half of each segment pigmented. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)
Zygaspis nigra	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. A member of the quadrifrons group, distinguished from all other species by the presence of a single large temporal shield (fused with postsupralabials) and its black and white colouration. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Description. A large species of Zygaspis with discrete preoculars, usually no parietals (rarely 1-3), a single postocular and a single temporal (postsupralabials fused with temporal). Postmental about 1 1/2 times as long as the mental; postgenials usually in two rows, 2 to 4 + 2 to 6; postmalars 5-16; 3 infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 183-205, on tail 40-54, with 14-24 dorsal and 12-16 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the 5th to 9th caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: 46 specimens (42%) have autotomised tails, some of them caused by being uncovered by earthmoving equipment. There are four precloacal pores on the last body annulus, 6-8 (rarely 4 or 5) precloacal and 10-18 postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 22-39; tail 13.9 • 20.0 % of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Largest 275 + 58 = 333 mm (NMZB-UM 10071, Kalabo, Zambia), but NMZB-UM 4818 from the same locality has a snout-vent length of 280 mm. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Colouration. Juveniles are pale, with brown pigmentation restricted to the proximal half of dorsal segments, while the ventrum is white anteriorly, with traces of brown pigment on the proximal edges of scattered ventral segments caudad. In adults the pigmentation becomes black and expands to cover a maximum of 90% on dorsal and 60% on ventral segments, but the chin and throat remain white, like scattered ventral segments caudad (Saiff, 1970: Fig. 15). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)
Zygaspis quadrifrons	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Definition (genus Shrevea). Snout rounded. Basipterygoid processes, partes posteriores choan arum and supratemporals absent. Quadrate dilated proximally. A peculiar post orbital arch formed by the parietal and the pterygoid. Dentition 7; 4; 7 [premaxillary, maxillary and mandibular number of teeth]. Prefrontal shields longitudinally divided, four in all. No fusion of head shields (Vanzolini 1951). Description (quadrifrons). Rostral moderate, triangular; nasal forming a suture with its fellow behind the rostral; a pair of prefrontals, separated from the first and second labials; no frontal; a pair of postfrontals; a pair of small parietals, rarely subdivided; a pair of small occipitals, rarely subdivided; no supraocular, but a preocular which extends above ocular and is in contact with a prefrontal and postfrontal above, a nasal before, and a first and second labial below; ocular moderate, eye distinct; 3 upper labials, third largest; 3-6 large temporals, upper in contact with a postfrontal, parietal and occipital, and anteriorly with ocular and third labial; mental moderate, subquadrangular; 3 lower labials, first small, second very large; postmental elongate; 2 chin shields separated by a large sublabial from the lower labials, or 4 chin shields, outer in contact with second lower labial; 221-242 annuli on body, 41-50 on tail; 33-38 (17-22 + 16-22) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments about two times as broad as long; 4-6 anals; 4 preanal pores. Dentition. "Premaxillary teeth 2; maxillaries 3-3; mandibulars 5-5," is given by Monard for ambuellensis but is almost certainly based on a defective series, cf. allied species. Measurements. Total length 208 (176 + 32) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 385)Diagnosis. A species of Zygaspis with discrete preoculars, variable fusion of shields in the temporal area (but a postsupralabial usually present) and body annuli usually in the range 207-245. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Description. A moderate sized Zygaspis with discrete preoculars, 0-5 parietals (usually 2); postoculars 2 (rarely one or 3-5), temporals one or two (rarely 3-5); supralabials three; postsupralabials one or two (rarely 0 or 3); mental and postmental subequal in length; postgenials usually in two rows 2 (rarely 3-5) + 0-8; postmalars 4-14; three infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 195-245, on tail 32-50, with 12-23 dorsal and 10-22 ventral segments in a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the 6th to 11th caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: 336 specimens (34%) haveautotomised tails. There are four precloacal pores on the last body annulus, 4-9 (usually 6) precloacal and 8-16 postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 25-58; tail 10.4-19.4% of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Largest specimen 245 + 43 = 288 mm, diameter 6.8 mm (NMZB-UM 19922, Karoi, Zimbabwe). The two other complete specimens from this locality also exceed 225 mm in snout-vent length. The only others in this class are three from Lukafu, southern Zaïre (including the holotype of katangae Witte & Laurent) and one Namibian specimen. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Colouration. Dorsum light purple-brown, darkening posteriorly, the segments may be darker on the proximal edge: this pigmentation may extend for two or three segments below the lateral sulcus. Otherwise the ventrum is unpigmented anteriorly, but becomes lightly pigmented caudad, especially on the subcaudals, this pigmentation is emphasised on the proximal edge of the segments. The pre-  and postcloacal segments generally lack pigment. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Diagnosis (katangae). “Cette sous-espèce se distingue de la forme typique par un nombre moins élevé d'anneaux dans le tronc (197 à 219 au lieu de 221 à 238), un nombre moins élevé de segments dans un anneau médian du tronc (14 à 18 dorsaux (chez un seul exemplaire) au lieu de 18 à 22, et 12 à 16 ventraux (chez un seul exemplaire) au lieu de 16 à 22) , la présence de 6 segments préanaux au lieu de 4, ainsi que de 3 labiales aussi bien supérieures qu'inférieures au lieu de 4.” (Witte & Laurent 1942)
Zygaspis violacea	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis. The most derived species of Zygaspis, with fusion of preoculars with prefrontals, parietals with frontals, a single postocular and a single large temporal with which the postsupralabials are fused. This species has lower counts of body annuli and higher counts of caudal annuli (and hence a proportionately longer tail) than any other species in the genus, it is also distinguished from parapatric populations of Z. vandami arenicola by its more numerous segments in a midbody annulus. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Description. A small species of Zygaspis which lacks discrete preoculars and parietals and has a single postocular and temporal, supralabials three, postsupralabials fused with temporal; postmental subequal in length to mental or much shorter (type of longicauda); postgenials in two or three rows, 2 or 3 + 4 to 6; postmalars 7-11; three infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 174-182, on tail 50-59, with 18-22 dorsal and 16-20 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the 7th to 9th caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: 3 specimens (43%) have autotomised tails. There are four precloacal pores in the last body annulus, except for SAM 44555, which has only two; 4-6 precloacal and 13-14 postcloacal segments; SVL/diameter 29-36; tail 18.9-23.3% of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Largest 165 + 50 = 215 mm, diameter 4.5 mm (NMZB 10006, holotype of Z. longicauda). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Colouration. Dorsum uniform blackish-brown apart from paler snout and supralabials; ventral segments with pigment restricted to anterior edge, chin, throat and cloacal segments largely white. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)
Zygaspis vandami	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DESCRIPTION. Snout rounded, prominent; rostral moderate, triangular; a nasals forming a suture behind rostral; followed by a pair of large pre-frontals, a pair of frontals and a pair of narrow occipitals; suture between pre-frontals and frontals about equal in length, but slightly longer than suture between nasals; temporals six on either side, arranged in two semi-vertical rows of three, largest superiorly and smallest inferiorly; superiormost temporal of anterior row largest, lying between frontal and third labial, just behind ocular; three upper labials, anterior smallest, posterior by far the largest; ocular moderate, eye distinct; no infra-ocular, the ocular forming a suture with second and third labials; mental trapezoidal in shape, followed by a large median pentagonal to heptagonal chin shield, and a pair of smaller chin shields with median suture; three lower labials, second very large; two chin shields on either side, the anterior in contact with second and third labials. About 196 annuli on body, and 49 to 50 on tail; each annulus contains 16 dorsal and 16 ventral segments; the two median ventral segments broader than the others. Lateral line, separating dorsal and ventral segments, distinct. Four, well-defined, much enlarged anal segments and four pre-anal pores. (FITZSIMONS 1930)COLOUR. (Spirit specimen.) Dull purple above; lighter below, with scattered whitish segments. (FITZSIMONS 1930)Diagnosis. A Zygaspis which has the preoculars fused with the prefrontals, but no fusion of shields in the temporal region, body annuli 183-206, caudal annuli 44-50 and 28-33 segments in a midbody annulus. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997) Description. A small species of Zygaspis with preoculars fused with the prefrontals; two parietals (rarely 4, 3 or 1); two postoculars (very rarely 3); two temporals (rarely 3 or 1); three supralabials; two postsupralabials (very rarely 3 or 1); postmental almost twice as long as mental; postgenials usually in two rows 2 + 2 to 4; postmalars 7-10; three infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 183-206, on tail 44-50, with 28-33 segments in a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the 6th to 10th caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: 9 specimens (29%) have autotomised tails. There are four precloacal pores in the last body annulus, 4-6 (rarely 7) precloacal and 10-15 postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 28-43; tail 14,7-18.8% of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Largest specimen (TMP 59095, Mahlaguza Pan, Kruger National Park) 143 + 30 = 173 mm, but exceeded in snout-vent length (172 mm) by NKW 235A (Pumbe sandveld, Kruger National Park). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997) Colouration. Uniform purple-brown above, slightly lighter below, darkening on the tail; chin and throat pale. Subadults are lighter in colour. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Diagnosis (arenicola). An eastern race of Z. vandami with variable fusion of head shields in the temporal area, in particular there is usually a single large temporal, but some specimens retain a single postsupralabial.Description (arenicola). (Paratype variations in parentheses) A small form of Zygaspis (but averaging larger than typical vandami), with preoculars fused with the prefrontals, parietals four (0-3), postocular one (2 in TP 3000 only), temporal one, postsupralabial absent; postmental almost 1 ½/ times as long as mental, postgenials in two rows (fused in two), 2 + 5 (4), postmalars 9 (7-11), three infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 206 (202-211), on tail 46 (47-50), with 32 (28-33) segments in a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the 9th (7th to 10th) caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: 32 specimens (33%) have autotomised tails, but this does not include any from Zimbabwe. There are four precloacal pores in the last body annulus, six (6-8) precloacal and 13 (11-14) postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 37 (31-43); tail 17.2 (17.0-17.8) % of total length.Variation in other populations (arenicola): in south-east Zimbabwe and Mozambique north of Lat. 25°30'S annuli counts for body (188-201) and tail (39-50) are lower, postoculars may be one or two, three Gonarezhou specimens have two temporals on one side of the head and NMZB-UM 28457 from Mapinhane has no parietals, but two postsupralabials. ZMB 50221, a syntype of Z. violacea with an autotomised tail, has 187 body annuli, which seems too high for violacea, but too low for a Maputo specimen of Z. arenicola! The ZwaZulu-Natal populations have low counts for body annuli (181-202), are variable for caudal annuli (39-52) and frequently have two postoculars and a postsupralabial.Size (arenicola). Holotype 120 = 25 = 145 mm. Largest specimen (TMP 62919, Mapelane, KwaZulu-Natal) 180 + 33 = 213 mm, but exceeded in snout-vent length (185 mm) by TMP 28507 from St. Lucia.Coloration (arenicola). Subadults are uniform light brown above and with brown pigmentation restricted to the proximal half of ventral segments. Adults become dark purple-brown with only the distal edges of the ventral segments unpigmented. Zimbabwean specimens are white below with brown pigmentation restricted to the subcaudals, where it may be patchy.
Monopeltis decosteri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. One large shield covering the head; a pair of occipitals; no preocular; ocular small, eye indistinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, not bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, not reaching the ocular; 3 upper labials, third largest; mental moderate; postmental large, pentagonal, in contact with the first and second lower labials; 2 chin shields, in contact with third lower labial; 193 annuli on body, 11 on tail; 34 (20 + 14) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments slightly more than two times as broad as long; 4 pectorals; 2 anals; 1-1 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941: 426)Measurements. Total length 215 (205 + 10) mm. (Loveridge 1941: 426)
Amphisbaena hiata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small form of Amphisbaena without major fusion of head shields; with one pair of large parietals and enlarged occipitals; a blunt-tipped cylindrical tail with a faint autotomy annulus at the eighth caudal annulus; two cicatricial precloacal pores separated by a pair of nonpored medial scales (hiatus), or without pores. Specimens have 202 to 213 body annuli; 18 to 19 caudal annuli; 16 to 17 dorsal and 18 to 22 ventral segments to the midbody annulus; one or two rows of postgenials and a postmalar row. The color of preserved specimens is light brown with the ventral region cre`me white, similar to that of live specimens (following Gans and Alexander, 1962).
Amphisbaena arda	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A medium-sized Amphisbaena with an elongate snout, paired nasals, frontals and parietals, 242 body and 30 caudal annuli, 23 dorsal and 23 ventral segments per annuli at midbody, 4 precloacal pores, 4 supralabials, and 3 infralabials. The distance between nostril and upper lip equals distance from nostril to suture between nasals. Additionally the new species differs from all other Amphisbaena by presenting a checkered black and white pattern which is restricted to dorsal and lateral parts of body; the ventral surface is immaculate creamy white [RODRIGUES 2003 (2002)].
Amphisbaena absaberi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A medium-sized form of Cercolophia, differing from all o ther species in the genus by the following combination of characters: snout rounded; head markedlly narrower than the trunk, laterally compressed, and convex in profile. A constriction of the neck with a distinct widening of the body immediately posterior to this. Upper head scales paired, including nasals (not completely separated from the rostral), prefrontals (enormous), frontals ( elongated and posteriorly projected), and relatively small parietals; no major fusions of head scales, though the upper parts of nasarostral sutures are lost; no postmalar row; 239-242 body annuli; 4 lateral and 14-15 caudal annuli; usually 18 dorsal and 18 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; lateral sulcus markedly apparent; two precloacal pores; a slightly narrowed 5th or 6 th caudal annulus (scales on it are narrower, their number being the same or fewer than in adjacent annuli) (Strüssmann & Carvalho, 2001).
Amphisbaena cuiabana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Strüssmann and Carvalho (2001) considered as diagnostic characters for A. cuiabana the presence of four precloacal pores and the highest number of body annuli (286-292) among its congeners. In fact, A. cuiabana only has fewer body annuli than A. supernumeraria (333-337), a northeast Brazilian species of amphisbaenid recently described (Mott et al. 2009). Authors when describing A. cuiabana mentioned the presence of a constriction site on 9th or 10th tail annuli, and they speculate the possibility of tail autotomy in this species, although they could not find any specimen with autotomized tail. With the additional specimens described by Silva et al. 2016, the range of the number of body annuli for A. cuiabana, changes from 282-286 to 278-309, and the tail annuli from 17-20 to 18-20 (with an autotomic site on annulus 8th). The largest specimen known for the species is 316 mm snout-vent length, and it seems that male has longer tails than female. The nasorostral scale is fused with nasals in some specimens (47 %), but not in all (53 %) as previously noticed by Strüssmann and Carvalho (2001).
Amphisbaena saxosa	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (original): Nasais independentes separadas pela rostral; supralabiais 4; 253-272 anéis corporais; 17-21 anéis caudais, 18-24:16-21 segmentos em um anel no meio do corpo, aba anal com 4 escamas alongadas dividindo a fileira de poros em duas áreas distintas, cada uma com dois poros.
Amphisbaena leali	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena leali is a moderate- sized (to 254 mm SVL), robust, longtailed, extensively pigmented species of Amphisbaena with caudal autotomy, without major alterations of the head scales, and with the Y chin configuration. It differs from all other Antillean species in having very wide, granule-filled interannular spaces, deepening to pits between the medially narrowed paramedian pairs of ventral segments. In being long-tailed and having large numbers of caudal annuli it is similar to A. caudalis; but in addition to the unique pitting, it differs in being somewhat heavier bodied (Fig. 3B), longer headed (Fig. 4C in THOMAS & HEDGES 2006), and in being extensively pigmented. It further differs from A. caudalis in having a higher number of cloacals (19-23 vs. 10-19), and higher number of total segments to a midbody annulus (35-38 vs. 32- 35) (Table 1). The internasal sutures of A. leali average shorter than the other species of southern Hispaniola, except for A. gonavensis. A few individuals of A. caudalis have somewhat widened interannular spaces ventrally, but none have either the extent or the deepness of the depressions characteristic of A. leali. Besides this unique feature, it differs from A. innocens in having longer body annuli posteriorly, long tail and high number of caudal annuli (17-20 vs. 10-13), and small first infralabials (Fig. 5). In higher “difference counts” (12-25 vs. -2-16) there is no overlap when the comparison is with the distal Tiburon Peninsula A. innocens (-2-7). The second row of postgenials has 4 versus a strong mode of 5 scales in A. innocens. Amphisbaena leali is more extensively and heavily pigmented than the majority of A. innocens, and it has larger hemipenes with greater development of pleats and terminal lamellae.
Amphisbaena cayemite	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena cayemite is a moderate-sized (to 220 mm SVL), robust, relatively long-headed, short-tailed species of Amphisbaena without caudal autotomy, having none of the major alterations of the head scales, and having chin condition Y. It is uniquely characterized by very long body annuli and extremely low body annulus counts (150-164), lower than any other Antillean species. Since it is not one of the long-tailed species, it bears comparison principally with A. innocens. Aside from its extremely low body annulus counts, it has high positive “difference counts,” not overlapping with distal Tiburon A. innocens (10- 30 vs. -2-7); in posterior annuli spanned by the jaw measurement, it is also lower than A. innocens (4.5-5.5 vs. 6-8). Five of the eight A. cayemite have two rows of postgenials, a very rare condition in A. innocens. There is no overlap in the “difference counts” with those of A. innocens from the distal Tiburon Peninsula (10-30 vs. -2-7). In number of segments to a midbody annulus, A. cayemite is almost completely separable from A. innocens in total segments (30-31 vs. 31-40), with only one specimen of A. innocens being at the low extreme of 31. In number of segments above the lateral fold (12-13 vs. 13- 18), the same relationship holds; and in segments below the lateral fold (18) A. cayemite is in the low part of the range of A. innocens.
Leposternon kisteumacheri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Leposternon kisteumacheri n.sp. is distinguished from all other Leposternon species by following combination of characters: (1) in life, bright yellow color pattern on dorsum and grayish white venter (uniformly grayish white in preservative); (2) presence of five series of large head shields; (3) two precloacal pores; (4) absence of supraocular, preocular, and infraocular shields. (Porto et al. 2000).DESCRIPTION: A medium-sized, elongate species (snout-vent length, 423-531mm) with head small and short (Fig. 1). Snout broad, slightly upturned in lateral profile (Figs. 2-3; 5-6). Dorsal head shields arranged in five series of large plates (Figs. 2; 5). Rostronasal shield wedge-shaped, weakly keratinized, wider than long, in contact with azygous, prefrontal and first supralabial. Azygous shield large, longer than wide, somewhat larger than frontal, in contact with rostronasal, prefrontals and frontals. Posterior vertice of azygous wedged between anterior ends of frontals. Prefrontal shields longer than frontals and azygous, touching the first supralabial latero-ventrally. Frontal longer than wide, facing its pair on the midline. Parietal wider than long, facing its pair in the midline; posteorly it contacts a small triangular shield, that is wider than long. Two supralabial shields, the first about two times the second. Three infralabial shields (Figs. 5; 7), the first on reduced, second largest; mental small followed by lengthened postmental shield. Supraocular, preocular, and infraocular absents. Eyes small, under ocular shield. Pectorals diamond-shaped (Figs. 4; 8), medium sized, decreasing in size laterally. Pectoral annuli, 15-16; post-pectoral annuli, 246; caudal-annuli, 11; lateral annuli, 4; segments per annulus, 23-25 + 25-28. Precloacal pores one on each side, rounded, small but well formed. In life, dorsum bright yellow, venter whitish. In preservative, uniformly grayish white (Porto et al. 2000).
Amphisbaena uroxena	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small Amphisbaena with a short, blunt, nonautotomic tail covered with small conic tubercules at their diagonal and dorsally oriented tip. This morphological feature is unique among South American amphisbaenians. No visible precloacal pores, paired nasals, prefrontals, frontals and parietals, 210– 213 body and 12–13 caudal annuli, 14 dorsal and 14–15 ventral segments per annuli at midbody, 3 supralabials, 3 infralabials. Head not distinct from the trunk, mouth ventral. Prefrontals are the largest head scales.
Amphisbaena townsendi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Nasals forming a suture on the snout; 4 preanal pores; 2 prefrontals, distinct from nasals and labials; suture between nasals about one-half that between prefrontals; temporals small; ocular in contact with second and tliird upper labials; no lateral Une; 44 segments in a ring on the middle of the body; 276 rings on the body (Stejneger 1911)Description of type specimen. Rostral small, the portion visible from above very short; nasals forming a suture, about one-half as long as that between the prefrontals, slightly shorter than the suture between the frontals; prefrontals large, the suture between them much longer than that between the frontals; frontals moderate, about half the size of the prefrontals; ocular moderate, about the same size as the third supralabial; 2 postoculars; temporal small; 3 no occipitals; 3 supralabials of equal length, second and third in contact with ocular; mental followed by a small median postmental; behind the second lower labial a medium-sized malar shield; behind the postmental and between the malars, 3 transverse rows of scales, consisting, respectively, of 4, 5, and 6 scales; 276 rings on the body, 25 on the tail; 44 segments in a ring around the body, the segments longer than broad and slightly narrower on back than on abdomen; no trace of a lateral line; anal shields, 6; preanal pores, 4.Color (in alcohol) above, dark purplish brown, the color of the back descending on the sides as irregular scattered spots; sides and underside pale. According to Mr. Townsend's note the living specimen had a distinct lavender pink tinge on forward half, especially about head. (Stejneger 1911)Measurements: snout-vent-length 206 mm, tail 21 mm, diameter of body 5 mm (Stejneger 1911)IDENTIFICATION: characters present in the key to subspecies of Amphisbaena occidentalis In Gans (1961): 22 to 26 caudal annuli; the seventh and/or eighth caudal annulus narrower, often with pigmented ventral segments, and with tail constricted at this autotomy level; some specimens with autotomized tail; tail longer; 4 to 5 postgenials in first row ; marked elongation of dorsal segments of trunk annuli 7 to 12A (Gans 1961).
Leposternon cerradensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Leposternon cerradensis is a medium-sized amphisbaenian (largest specimen snout-vent length 385 mm) diagnosed by the following combination of characters (measurements in mm): one or two pairs of precloacal pores, 299–341 dorsal postpectoral half-annuli, 302–349 ventral postpectoral half-annuli, 13–15 tail annuli, 118–121 precloacal vertebrae, 32–37 dorsal segments in midbody half-annulus, 30–36 ventral segments in midbody half-annulus, two supralabials, two infralabials, four series of large plates in dorsal head shields posterior to rostronasal, pectoral shields mostly diamond-shaped, head length 2.6–3.2% snoutvent length, rostronasal length 20.4–23.1% head length, azygous width 30.8–41.9% head width, azygous length 40.1–51.4% head length, frontal length with 23.7–38.2% head length, and prefrontal length 37.2– 44.4% head length.
Amphisbaena acrobeles	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: This new species of Anops may be distinguished from A. bilabialatus and A. kingii by showing an extremely narrow head (37.2% head length vs. 62.5–77.6% head length; Fig. 4); a row of eight occipitals anterior to the first body annulus (Fig. 3A; vs. scutes absent); temporal present (Fig. 3B; vs. absent); mental and postmental fused (vs. distinct); four rows of postgenials located between malars (Fig. 3C; vs. one); two malars posterior to the second infralabial (Fig. 3C; vs. one). Additionally, A. acrobeles differs from A. bilabialatus by showing an elongate rostral in contact with the frontals (vs. rostral relatively short and separated from the frontals); frontal longer than wide (vs. frontal wider than long); ocular relatively elongate, representing 27.7% of head length (vs. short ocular, 12.5–14.7% of head length); three supralabials (vs. two); postsupralabial absent (vs. present); three infralabials (vs. two). It further differs from A. kingii by not showing a preocular and a postsupralabial (vs. present). Moreover, second supralabial in the new species is ca. two times longer than the other supralabials (vs. supralabials with similar proportions); second supralabial longer than high (vs. second supralabial higher than long); 296 + n (specimen mutilated, missing posterior third of body) body annuli (vs. 214– 244 body annuli).
Amphisbaena fuliginosa	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SPECIES: Head relatively massive, snout prominent, swollen. Body stocky, total length of adults usually 350 to 500 mm, one specimen 555 mm. Tail clavate; autotomy annulus, fifth to seventh. Rostral moderate, low. Nasals large, in contact with the second supralabial. Prefrontal moderate. Postfrontals forming together a rough hexagon, wider than long. Three upper labials, the first smallest, the second and third variously divided and fused, at times suggesting preoculars or anterior suboculars. One true subocular, above the third labial, which may be horizontally split. Two irregular temporal series. Symphysial roughly anvil-shaped, sometimes fused with one of the infralabials, which are 3 or 4, at times split or fused. Post-symphysial elongate, sometimes longitudinally split. Remaining scales of the mental region variable (Vanzolini 2002).Conclusion of Vanzolini (2002): There is only one species, A. fuliginosa, involved. This species occupies continually one very large area, subdivided into two equally very large adjacent territories, in which occur two contrasting and well-characterized plant formations, rainforest and cerrado. There is one locality in the Atlantic forest. In the forested territory the species is obviously in a stage of advanced but still incomplete differentiation. There are broad areas of well defined and characteristic color patterns, separated by relatively narrow transition belts. The data on quantitative characters do not quite permit to say that they are exactly coextensive with that of the color pattern, but the location of the transitional belts is highly suggestive. There are not yet adequate data on cerrado populations. A first impression is, as said, one of strong inter-deme differentiation (Carson 1987). 
Amphisbaena supernumeraria	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small and slender Amphisbaena with four precloacal pores, 333–337 body annuli, 22–23 caudal annuli, discrete autotomic site on annuli 10–12, and tip of the tail pointed or keeled (Fig. 3), 14 dorsal and 17–18 ventral segments per annuli at midbody, fainted ventral sulcus. Nasal and prefrontal scales absent, fused with the rostral; frontal scales fused forming a single, large and wide heptagonal scale, the largest scale on top of head; three supra and three infralabials. The presence of more than 300 body annuli as well as the presence of frontal scales fused, forming a single large scale on top of head, and the tenth anteriormost body annuli chevron-shaped are unique characters among Amphisbaena and separate this species from all other congeners.
Amphisbaena brevis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Among the two-pored species of Amphisbaena, A. brevis sp. n. has only 139 body annuli, while A. dubia Müller, 1924, A. mitchelli Procter, 1923, A. leeseri Gans, 1964, A. miringoera Vanzolini, 1971, and A. hiata Montero & Ce´ spedez, 2002 have more than 200. Amphisbaena brevis sp. n. can be easily distinguished from A. silvestrii Boulenger, 1902, A. neglecta Dunn & Piatt, 1936, A. crisae Vanzolini, 1997 and A. anaemariae Vanzolini, 1997 by the belly that lacks pigment, in striking contrast with the heavily pigmented ventral surface of the tail, and the least number of body annuli (139 instead of more than 150 for the other species). It can be further distinguished from these four species by a higher number of dorsal midbody segments (18 instead of 10–12, 12–14, 10, and 14–16, respectively). The new species differs from A. trachura Dume´ ril & Bibron, 1839 and A. heterozonata Burmeister, 1861 by the lower number of body annuli (139 instead of 178–199 and 190–207, respectively), and lower number of midbody ventral segments (14 instead of 16–22 and 15–22).
Mesobaena rhachicephala	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A new species allocated to Mesobaena based on description provided by Gans (1971), having following combination of characters: (1) head and snout more pointed than keel-shaped; (2) snout prognathous; (3) nostrils in small nasals on underside snout; (4) large, elongate and coniform rostral; (5) posterior tip rostral reaching level anterior tips oculars; (6) large prefrontals in contact behind rostral; (7) medium-sized frontals in broad medial contact; (8) two supralabials, first small, second very large; (9) elongate triangular ocular; (10) very small eye visible in anterior tip ocular; (11) one postocular; (12) mental in contact with first and second infralabials, ending in two sharp points; (13) oval postmental; (14) two infralabials, first small, second very large; (15) second infralabial twice as high as second supralabial; (16) three or four irregular rows of postgenials; (17) regular segments in gular region; (18) dorsal body scales quadrangular with central depression; (19) ventral body scales rectangular without central depression; (20) body scales arranged in transverse row (annuli); (21) no dorsal, lateral or ventral sulci; (22) two pairs of precloacal pores separated by two median scales without pores; (23) poorly marked autotomy annulus present in holotype (seventh tail annulus), but absent in two paratypes; (24) tail tip with an elevated, flat, wide, vertical, unsegmented band-like double edged structure with concave sides; (25) hemipenis without spines or distinct ridges, sulcus spermaticus only on proximal one third; (26) color in life pink on head and anterior body, more posteriorly dorsal parts brown, ventral parts cream, tip of tail very dark brown; (27) eye bright blue; (28) in preservative anterior part body and ventral region cream, dorsal parts brown, darkest on tail tip; (29) SVL in male 245 mm, in female 253 mm.
Amphisbaena carli	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena carli is diagnosable from all congeners by the following conjunction of characters: (1) small nasals separated from each other by the rostral; (2) two pre-cloacal pores separated from each other by the cloacal shield; (3) 221–242 body annuli; (4) 10–13 caudal annuli; (5) 21–23 dorsal and 21– 23 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; (6) tail without visible autotomic constriction. Comparisons are based on literature data (Gray 1865; Gans 1964; Gans 1971; Vanzolini 1971; Vanzolini 1991b; Vanzolini 1992; Strüssmann e De Carvalho 2001; Vanzolini 2002; Castro-Mello 2003; Hoogmoed et al. 2009; Mott & Vieites 2009; Ribeiro et al. 2009) and specimens examined (Appendix). In order to make comparisons clear, species were separated by groups reflecting the taxonomy before Mott and Vieites (2009). Amphisbaena carli is distinguished from Mesobaena huebneri Mertens and M. rhachicephala Hoogmoed et al. by having a rounded rostrum, instead of a keel-shaped rostrum in both species of Mesobaena. It also differs from the species of Amphisbaena formally placed at the genus Anops—Amphisbaena bilabialata (Stimson), A. kingii (Bell) and A. acrobeles (Ribeiro et al.)—by having a rounded snout against a vertically keeled rostrum in the later species. It differs from the species of Amphisbaena formally placed at the genus Aulura—Amphisbaena anomala (Barbour)—by having a rounded snout against a shovel-shaped rostrum in the later species. It differs from the species of Amphisbaena formally placed at the genus Leposternon— Amphisbaena infraorbitale (Berthold), A. kisteumacheri (Porto et al.), A. microcephalum (Wagler), A. octostegum (Duméril), A. polystegum (Duméril), A. scutigerum Hemprich and A. wuchereri (Peters)— by having a rounded snout against a shovel-shaped rostrum in the later species. It differs from the species of Amphisbaena formally placed at the genus Cercolophia—Amphisbaena absaberi (Strüssmann & de Carvalho), A. bahiana Vanzolini, A. borellii Peracca, A. cuiabana (Strüssmann & de Carvalho), A. roberti Gans and A. steindachneri Strauch—by having no keeled tail, present in the later species. Amphisbaena carli shares with the species of Amphisbaena formally placed at the genus Bronia— Amphisbaena bedai (Vanzolini), A. brasiliana, A. kraoh (Vanzolini) and A. saxosa— the strongly curved rostrum. Besides, it also shares with A. brasiliana and A. saxosa the nasals separated from each other by the rostral. However, it can be easily distinguished from these four species by having only two pores (against six in A. kraoh and four in A. brasiliana, A. bedai and A. saxosa) and 240–242 body annuli (against 213–229 in A. brasiliana, 253–272 in A. saxosa, 272–284 in A. bedai, and 281 in A. kraoh). It differs from the two-pored species formally placed at the genus Amphisbaena—A. anaemariae Vanzolini, A. brevis Strüssmann & Mott, A. crisae Vanzolini, A. darwini Duméril & Bibron, A. dubia Müller, A. heterozonata Burmeister, A. hiata Montero & Céspedez, A. leeseri Gans, A. miringoera Vanzolini, A. mitchelli Procter, A. neglecta Dunn & Piatt, A. silvestrii Boulenger and A. trachura Cope—by having small nasals separated from each other by the rostral (against large nasals touching each other on the midline in the later species). It is further distinguishable from A. anaemariae, A. brevis, A. crisae, A. darwini, A. dubia, A. heterozonata, A. mitchelli, A. neglecta, A. silvestrii and A. trachura by having 240–242 body annuli (against less than 231 in the other species). Amphisbaena carli can also be distinguished from A. miringoera by having 12–13 caudal annuli (against 22–24) and from A. hiata and A. leeseri, by having no autotomic site (present in those species) [from PINNA et al. 2010].
Leposternon maximus	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Leposternon maximus sp. nov. differs from all amphisbaenians by presenting 404‐448 dorsal postpec‐ toral half‐annuli and 408‐448 ventral postpectoral half‐ annuli. the new species also differs from all south american amphisbaenians, (except from species of the genus Leposternon) for presenting nostrils opening on the ventral surface of snout; nasal absent; rostral and nasals fused into a single shield; gular portion without segmental cover; and prefrontals bone with nasal process long and ‘T’ shaped. Differs from all south american amphisbaenians, except of Aulura anomala and other species of Leposternon for presenting frontal portion of head strongly depressed; and pectoral shields with irregular form, not disposed in dermal annuli.
Amphisbaena albocingulata	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena albocingulata is distinguished from other Amphisbaena species by the following combination of characters: (1) rounded snout; (2) nasal shields in contact on the dorsal portion of head; (3) caudal autotomy externally visible; (4) plain segments in the tip of the tail; (5) four precloacal pores; (6) 3/3 supralabial and 3/3 infralabial shields; (7) 190–204 body annuli; (8) 24–27 caudal annuli; (9) 12–14 dorsal and 16–18 ventral segments in the midbody annulus; (10) absence of the postmalar row [from Perez et al. 2012].See also diagnosis and detailed description in Gans 1966: 248.
Amphisbaena maranhensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small species of Amphisbaena, without major fusion of head shields: rostral, nasals, prefrontals, frontals, parietals and labials are distinct. Three supralabials, irregularly polygonal; first supralabial, rhomboid, longer and lower than the second and third; three infralabials, third one, pentagonal, higher than the first and second. Two rows of postgenials, first with two scales and second with three scales, lacking a postmalar row. Body annuli 306, caudal annuli 21, with the eighth postcloacal annulus more pigmented than adjacent annuli, 10 dorsal segments and 14 ventral segments in a midbody annulus, and no precloacal pores. Tip of tail with a vertical keel. Dorsal sulcus absent, lateral sulci distinct.
Amphisbaena littoralis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: The new species is diagnosable by snout-vent length 248.8 ± 10.9 mm SVL in males and 257.3 ± 24 mm SVL in females, six precloacal pores, 252–264 body annuli, 20–22 dorsal and 21–24 ventral segments to the midbody annulus (Table 1). Nasals in broad contact at midline, without fusion of head scales. Three supralabials, third one larger; three infralabials, second the largest. Suture between frontals two times larger than the parietal and nasal sutures. Lateral sulci present, starting on 42th segment, no dorsal or ventral sulci. Tail long with length maximum 70mm and cylindrical, 30–34 tail annuli with autotomy on the 6th tail annuli, rounded tip of the tail.Sales et al. (2019) redefined some diagnostic characters of A. littoralis: snout–vent length 143–278 mm; tail length 19.3–70 mm; body annuli 251–270; tail annuli 29–34; dorsal and ventral segments of midbody annulus 19–22 and 20–24, respectively; precloacal pores 5–6 (usually 6); and supralabials 3–4 (usually 4).
Amphisbaena caiari	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: (1) A small sized species, maximum SVL = 157 mm; (2) two precloacal pores; (3) precloacal pores arranged in a continuous series; (4) snout rounded in lateral and dorsal views; (5) tip of tail rounded; (6) body annuli 233–250; (7) caudal annuli 20–24; (8) autotomy sites on caudal annuli 6–9; (9) 10 dorsal and 12–14 ventral segments per annulus at midbody; (10) postmalar row absent; (11) suture between frontals slightly smaller than parietal and nasal sutures; (12) tail short relative to body length (tail length/body length = 0.10).Comparisons: Characters from other species are presented in parenthesis. Among the South American two-pored Amphisbaena species, the rounded snout immediately distinguishes the new species from A. cerradensis (Ribeiro, Vaz-Silva and Santos Jr, 2008), A. maxima (Ribeiro, Nogueira, Cintra, Silva and Zaher, 2011) (dorsoventrally compressed, shovel-like snout), A. acrobeles (Ribeiro, Castro-Mello and Nogueira, 2009) and A. bilabialata (Stimson, 1972) (laterally compressed, with a conspicuous vertical keel). The rounded tail diagnoses it from A. absaberi (Strüssmann and Carvalho, 2001), A. bahiana Vanzolini, 1964, A. roberti Gans, 1964, (a sharp terminal vertical keel on tail), A. leeseri Gans, 1964, and A. bilabialata (a blunt terminal vertical keel). The presence of two pores arranged in a continuous series distinguishes the new species from A. absaberi, A. anomala, A. bilabialata, A. carli Pinna, Mendonça, Bocchiglieri & Fernandes, 2010, A. cerradensis, A. hiata Montero & Céspedez, 2002, and A. maxima (scales bearing pores separated from each other by one or more non-pored scales).Among the remaining two-pored, South American species of Amphisbaena, the occurrence of 233–250 body annuli distinguishes the new species from A. anaemariae Vanzolini, 19697, A. brevis Strüssmann & Mott, 2009, A. crisae Vanzolini, 1997, A. darwini Duméril and Bibron, 1839, A. dubia Müller, 1924, A. heterozonata Burmeister, 1861, A. mitchelli, A. neglecta Dunn and Piatt, 1936, and A. silvestrii Boulenger, 1902 (< 231 body annuli) and from A. miringoera Vanzolini, 1971 (> 250 body annuli). The occurrence of 20–24 caudal annuli differs from counts of A. anaemariae, A. brevis, A. dubia, A. heterozonata and A. neglecta (< 20 caudal annuli) and A. mitchelli (> 26 caudal annuli). The occurrence of the autotomic site in caudal annuli 6–9 differs from the condition found in A. anaemarie, A. brevis, A. crisae, A. dubia, A. leeseri, A. neglecta and A. silvestrii (autotomy site absent or in an anterior to caudal annulus 6). The presence of 10 dorsal and 12–14 ventral segments differs from all other two-pored species (> 10 dorsal or > 14 ventral segments; < 12 ventral segments in A. crisae), with the exception of A. silvestrii (10–12 dorsal and 10–14 ventral segments). Also, the new species can be distinguished from A. darwini, A. heterozonata, and A. lumbricalis Vanzolini, 1996 by having a fixed number of 2 pores (2–6 pores), and from A. dubia (0 or 2 pores). Additionally, A. caiari sp. nov. can be distinguished from A. crisae, A. darwini and A. dubia by the absence of postmalars (present) (Fig. 3). From A. anaemariae, A. crisae, A. darwini, A. heterozonata and A. lumbricalis, the new species differs by having a suture between prefrontals that is smaller than the suture between the frontals (suture between prefrontals larger than between frontals) (Fig. 3). In having having TL/BL = 0.10, it differs from A. anaemariae, A. darwini, A. mitchelli, A. silvestrii, and A. crisae (0.13–0.16 TL/BL) and A. carli (0.06 TL/BL) (Fig. 4).A few additional species were also recorded in the same geographic region where the new species was found: Amphisbaena alba Linnaeus 1758, A. fuliginosa, and A. cunhai Hoogmoed & Avila-Pires, 1991. Amphisbaena caiari sp. nov. can be distinguished from those species by the presence of two pores (> 4), the occurrence of 20–24 caudal annuli (≥ 24 in all species except A. alba, which has ≤ 21); and the presence of 10 dorsal and 12–14 ventral segments (> 14 dorsal and ventral segments). Also, the maximum known SVL of 157 mm in the new species is smaller than in other species (> 400 mm SVL).
Zygaspis dolichomenta	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Original description: “Museau arrondi. Rostrale triangulaire, non ou à peine visible du dessus; nasales formant une suture; 4 préfrontales allongées dessinant une courbe à concavité postérieure; une paire de frontales; occipitales absentes, remplacées par les deux écailles médiodorsales du premier anneau, fortement allongées vers l'avant; œil distinct, recouvert par l'oculaire qui forme une suture avec les 2e et 3e labiales, ainsi qu'avec la frontale; 2 grandes temporales; 3 supérieures-labiales, la 3e la plus grande; symphysiale trapézoïdale à côtés incurvés, suivie d'une mentonnière pentagonale allongée, à côtés parallèles; 3 inférieures-labiales, la seconde seule formant une suture avec la mentonnière. 194 à 197 anneaux, 42 à 47 sur la queue; un anneau au milieu du corps renferme 30 à 34 segments (16 à 18 dorsaux, 14 à 16 ventraux); 6 segments préanaux (4 chez le Paratype d'Eala); 4 pores préanaux. Pigmentation semblable à celle de A. quadrifrons katangae. Faces dor sales grisâtres, ventrales blanchâtres, immaculées sous la tête, plus ou moins irrégulièrement marqué de raies transversales foncées occupant toujours moins de la moitié antérieure des anneaux sous le tronc, régu lièrement marqué d'épaisses raies transversales occupant plus de la moitié antérieure des anneaux sous la queue.” (Witte & Laurent 1942)Original diagnosis (meridionalis): “A. dolichomenta meridionalis paraît relier la forme typique a A. quadrifrons. Il se rapproche de la première par la rostrale à peine visible du dessus, l'incorporation de deux rangées d'écailles du tronc à l'écaillure céphalique et la forme de la seconde de ces rangées, les pro portions du corps (queue représentant 21 % de la longueur du tronc, lequel comprend 28 fois son diamètre). Par la forme et les connexions de la mentonniere, il est intermédiaire à ces deux formes. En effet, cette plaque possède des bords bombés comme ils le sont fréquemment chez 4 quadrifrons katangae, mais chez aucun des trois exemplaires de A. do lchomenta dolichomenta; elle possède également une suture ave la 1 re labiale, qui ne représente, il est vrai que le cinquième environ de la suture de la mentonnière ave la 2e labiale, alors qu'elle en vaut au moins le tiers chez A. quadrifrons katangae. Gette dernière suture, qui va au moins I 3/4 fois dans la longueur de la mentonnière chez A. qua drifrons katangae, y va seulement 1 1/2 fois chez A. dolichomenta meri dionalis. Enfin, les occipitales antérieures sont présentes, bien que ré duites par conséquent, il existe 3 paires d'occipitales, et les deux paires postérieures sont moins allongées que chez la forme typique.” (Witte & Laurent 1942)Diagnosis. A member of the Z. quadrifrons group, distinguished from quadrifrons by its large size, low number of body annuli and elongate postmental. It differs from Z. nigra in having head shields in the temporal region unfused. It differs from Z. ferox in having only 28-32 segments to a midbody annulus (vs 34-40). It differs from Z. kafuensis in lacking a short blind nasal sulcus and in its more robust build (SVL/diameter 25-33 vs 35-40). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Description. A large species of Zygaspis with discrete preoculars, 2-5 parietals, 2 postoculars, 2-3 temporals, 3 supralabials and 2 postsupralabials. Postmental 1½ to 2 times as long as mental; postgenials in two rows 2 + 2-6; postmalars 6-9; 3 infralabials, second much the largest. Annuli on body 195-199, on tail 37-44, with 16-17 dorsal and 13-15 ventral segments in a midbody annulus, the lateral sulci are well defined. A slight constriction following the 7th to 9th caudal annulus marks the autotomy site: one specimen (20%) has an autotomised tail. There are four precloacal pores on the last body annulus, 6-7 precloacal and 12-13 postcloacal segments. SVL/diameter ratio 25-33; tail 15.8 to 18.7 % of total length. (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)Size. Largest (Holotype) 226 + 52 =278 mm (diameter 7 mm).Colouration. Brown pigmentation not extending, to the distal edges of dorsal segments and restricted to the proximal edges o f ventral segments (Saiff, 1970: Fig. 16). (BROADLEY & BROADLEY 1997)
Amphisbaena persephone	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena persephone is diagnosable from all other congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) rounded snout; (2) slender body (Table 1); (3) lateral and dorsal sulci well visible; (4) two rounded precloacal pores medially located; () 230–241 body annuli; (6) 19–22 caudal annuli; (7) 12–14 dorsal and 14 ventral segments to a midbody annulus; (8) tail with a marked autotomic constriction at caudal annuli 6–8; (9) tail tip laterally compressed; (10) three supralabials followed by one postsupralabial, and three infralabials followed by one post- infralabial on each side of the head.By the presence of two precloacal pores, Amphisbaena persephone differs from all the other rounded-snout species of Amphisbaena, except: A. absaberi (Strüssmann and Carvalho, 2001); A. anaemariae Vanzolini, 1997; A. brevis Strüssmann and Mott, 2009; A. carli Pinna, Mendonc ̧a, Bocchiglieri, and Fernandes, 2010; A. crisae Vanzolini, 1997; A. cuiabana (Strüssmann and Carvalho,2001); A. darwini Duméril and Bibron, 1839; A. dubia Müller, 1924; A. heterozonata Burmeister, 1861; A. hiata Montero and Ce ́spedez, 2002; A. leeseri Gans, 1964a; A. lumbricalis Vanzolini, 1996; A. miringoera Vanzolini, 1971; A. mitchelli Procter, 1923; A. neglecta Dunn and Piatt, 1936; A. roberti Gans, 1964c; and A. silvestrii Boulenger, 1902.Among the species mentioned above, Amphisbaena persephone sp. nov. differs from A. absaberi, A. carli, and A. hiata by having no median hiatus between the precloacal pores (compared to pores separated from each other by a median hiatus in the latter species). The new species differs from A. anaemariae, A. brevis, A. crisae, A. darwini, A. heterozonata, A. mitchelli, A. neglecta, and A. silvestrii in having a greater number of body annuli (230– 241, compared to fewer than 220 in the latter species). The new species differs from A. cuiabana in having a smaller number of body annuli (230–241, compared to more than 280 in the latter species). The presence of a well-marked dorsal sulcus (at least after the first third of the body) in A. persephone sp. nov. differentiates it from A. dubia, A. leeseri, and A. lumbricalis (wherein no dorsal sulcus is present). Compared to A. miringoera, the new species has a smaller number of body annuli (20–264 and 230–241, respectively) and a laterally compressed tail tip (rounded in A. miringoera). Finally, A. persephone sp. nov. differs from A. roberti by having a laterally compressed tail tip (but without a distinct keel) composed of flat-surfaced segments and a marked autotomic constriction at caudal annuli 6–8 (compared to a distinct transversal keel composed of conical segments on the tip of the tail and a faint or absent autotomic constriction in A. roberti). Furthermore, A. persephone sp. nov. often presents a smaller number of body annuli (230–241) and dorsal segments (ca.12) to a midbody annulus (compared to 232–26 body annuli and 13–16 dorsal segments in A. roberti).
Cynisca chirioi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: “Museau arrondi, segments pectoraux non différenciés et rostrale petite caractéristiques du genre Cynisca. Cynisca chirioi sp. nov. diffère de toutes les autres espèces connues dans le genre Cynisca par la présence d’un grand nombre de segments autour du milieu du corps : 44 chez l’holotype, dont 26 dorsaux et 18 ventraux, alors que ce nombre est inférieur à 40 chez tous les spécimens connus des autres espèces de ce genre. Les autres caractéristiques de C. chirioi sp. nov. sont sa grande taille (290 mm pour l’holotype), la présence d’une frontale médiane, une écaillure céphalique complète à l’exception de la supraoculaire qui est absente, la présence 12 pores cloacaux, de 235 anneaux le long du corps et de 25 anneaux le long de la queue.”
Cynisca manei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: “Museau arrondi, segments pectoraux non différenciés et rostrale petite caractéristiques du genre Cynisca. Cynisca manei sp. nov. diffère de toutes les autres espèces connues dans le genre Cynisca par la combinaison des caractères suivants : (1) la présence d’une frontale médiane, (2) la fusion, de chaque côté de la tête, de la nasale avec les supralabiales antérieures, la préoculaire et la préfrontale, (3) la présence d’une oculaire distincte, (4) la fusion de la première supralabiale postérieure avec la postoculaire, (5) la fusion de la deuxième supra-labiale postérieure avec les temporales, (6) la présence à chaque anneau de huit segments dorsaux et de sept segments ventraux avec un segment médio-ventral très élargi.” (Trape 2014)
Cynisca ivoirensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: “Cette espèce se distingue de toutes les autres espèces du genre par la combinaison des caractères suivants: frontale, oculaire, temporale et occipitale distinctes, fusion des supralabiales antérieures avec la nasale et la préfrontale, fusion de la post-frontale avec la pariétale, présence de trois supralabiales postérieures et de deux temporales, 10 ou 12 segments dorsaux, huit segments ventraux et six pores cloacaux.”
Leposternon bagual	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Leposternon bagual sp. nov. is a medium-sized amphisbaenian (largest specimen total length 309.5 mm) and can be characterized as a Leposternon and distinguished from all South American amphisbaenians by having the nostril openings on the ventral surface of snout, rostral and nasals fused into a single shield, gular portion without segmental cover and prefrontal bones in facial view with nasal process long and ‘T’ shaped (details of skull in Gans & Montero 2009) (Ribeiro et al. 2008). Additionally, the new species differs from all other South American amphisbaenians, except Leposternon spp. and Amphisbaena anomala (Barbour, 1914), in having the frontal portion of the head greatly depressed and pectoral shields irregular (not arranged in dermal regular annuli). It differs from the other species of the genus by the presence of rostral processes in the maxillae and nasals that contact each other in the facial portion of the skull (Fig. 3, Table 1). The new species further differs from L. cerradensis Ribeiro, Vaz-Silva & Santos-Jr, 2008, L. infraorbitale (Berthold, 1859), L. microcephalum, L. octostegum (Duméril, 1851), L. scutigerum (Hemprich, 1820) and L. wuchereri (Peters, 1879) by the presence of 3 infralabial shields; and from L. cerradensis, L. kisteumacheri Porto, Soares & Caramaschi, 2000, L. maximus Ribeiro, Nogueira, Cintra, Silva Jr. & Zaher, 2011, and L. polystegum (Duméril, 1851) by lacking precloacals pores.Leposternon bagual is further characterized by the following combination of pholidotic, meristic, cranial, and morphometric characters (see also Table 1 for a synthesis of diagnostic features within the genus): 1) two supralabials; 2) supraocular present; 3) 240–267 dorsal postpectoral half-annuli; 4) 206–214 ventral postpectoral half-annuli; 5) 11–12 tail annuli; 6) 27–29 dorsal segments in midbody half-annulus; 7) 23–27 ventral segments in midbody half-annulus; 8) 96 precloacal vertebrae; 9) many small and irregularly shaped pectoral shields (Fig. 1D); 10) adults specimens dark brown dorsally; 11) five premaxillary teeth; 12) four maxillary teeth; 13) six dentary teeth; 14) rostral process of nasal present; 15) rostral process of maxilla present; 16) premaxillary foramina present; 17) head length with 3.5–4.5% of snout-vent length; 18) rostronasal length with 22.6–23.5% of head length; 19) rostronasal width with 64.0–68.1% of the greatest width of head; 20) azygous length with 29.3–35.0% of head length; 21) azygous width representing 35.6–45.8% of the greatest width of head; 22) frontal suture length with 25.3–25.5% of head length; 23) parietal suture with 9.8–13.9% of head length; 24) temporal length with 18.9– 22.0% of head length; 25) temporal width with 13.2–17.8% of head width; 26) prefrontals length with 23.0–26.8% of head length; 27) prefrontals width with 38.3–41.7% of head width; 28) height posterior of head comprising 69.0–72.5% of head length; 30) comissure of the mouth length comprising 53.4–59.1% of head length; 29) midbody width with 3.2–4.4% of snout-vent length; and 30) tail length representing 4.9–5.6% of snout-vent length.
Amphisbaena metallurga	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. is diagnosed by the following combination of characters: (1) head round-shaped; (2) two or three precloacal pores sequentially arranged; (3) 190–199 body annuli; (4) 2–3 lateral annuli; (5) 23–25 caudal annuli; (6) autotomy plan on 7th – 9th caudal annulus; (7) 12–14 dorsal segments on midbody annulus; (8) 14–16 ventral segments on midbody annulus; (9) three supralabials; (10) three infralabials; (11) postmalar row usually present; (12) body slenderness proportion from 32.6 to 38.3; (13) dorsum of preserved specimens light brown, with cream intersegmental sutures; (14) venter of preserved specimens cream colored.Comparison with other species. The presence of two or three precloacal pores makes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. readily distinguishable from all South American congeners with the exception of A. absaberi, A. anaemariae, A. anomala, A. angustifrons, A. bilabialata, A. bolivica, A. brevis, A. caiari, A. camura, A.carli, A. cerradensis, A. crisae, A. cuiabana, A. darwinii, A. dubia, A. heterozonata, A. hiata, A. kisteumacheri, A. leeseri, A. lumbricalis, A. maxima, A. miringoera, A. mitchelli, A. neglecta, A. persephone, A. polystega, A. roberti and A. silvestrii. Among these species (characters inside parentheses), the rounded head easily distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. anomala, A. cerradensis, A. kisteumacheri, A. maxima, A. polystega (head shovel-shaped) and A. bilabialata (head keel-shaped). Therefore, these six species are excluded from following comparisons.The rounded tail distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. trachura (caudal tip tuberculate), A. absaberi, A. cuiabana and A. roberti (tail with a terminal vertical keel). The rostral without median contact with prefrontals distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. carli (rostral in broad contact with prefrontals). The presence of precloacal pores arranged in sequence distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. absaberi, A. carli and A. hiata (precloacal pores separated from each other by segments).The presence of 190–199 body annuli distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. absaberi (239–242), A. anaemaeriae (156–170), A. bolivica (200–231), A. brevis (139), A. caiari (233–250), A. carli (221–248), A. crisae (180–185), A. cuiabana (283–320), A. dubia (211– 231), A. hiata (202–213), A. leeseri (216–249), A. lumbricalis (225–247), A. miringoera (250–264), A. mitchelli (203–220), A. neglecta (151–161), A. persephone (230–241) and A. roberti (232–265). The presence of 23–25 caudal annuli distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. absaberi (14–15), A. anaemaeriae (18–20), A. angustifrons (12–18), A. brevis (9), A. camura (14–19), A. carli (10–14), A. crisae (20–22), A. cuiabana (17–21), A. dubia (13–18), A. heterozonata (13–18), A. hiata (17–19), A. leeseri (14–19), A. mitchelli (26– 29), A. neglecta (14–16) , A. persephone (19–22) and A. roberti (17–20). Autotomy in annuli 7–9 distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. absaberi (5–6), A. anaemaeriae (3–5), A. angustifrons (autotomy absent), A. bolivica (3–5), A. camura (3–5), A. carli (autotomy absent), A. crisae (4–6), A. dubia (autotomy absent), and A. neglecta (4–6).The presence of 12–14 dorsal segments distinguishes Amphisbaena metallurga sp. nov. from A. brevis (18) and A. caiari (10). The number of both dorsal and ventral segments (12–14 / 14– 16) distinguishes the new species from A. absaberi (16–19 / 17–20), A. angustifrons (20–31 / 21–30), A. bolivica (27–38 / 26–36), A. camura (28–42 / 29–46), A. carli (20–23 / 18–23), A. crisae (10 / 10) and A. hiata (16–18 / 18–22). A summary of morphological characters for two-pored and three-pored Amphisbaena is provided in Table SI.Despite the differences above mentioned, the new species is more similar to Amphisbaena darwinii, A. heterozonata, A. prunicolor, A. trachura and A. silvestrii in the traditional meristic data, but can be further distinguished by the following characters: From A. prunicolor by the number of precloacal pores (two or three in A. metallurga sp. nov. and four in A. prunicolor), and color pattern (light brown dorsally and cream ventrally in A. metallurga sp. nov., and dark brown dorsally and ventrally (sometimes checkered) in A. prunicolor) (see Perez et al. 2012 for pictures of A. prunicolor). From A. silvestrii the new species can be distinguished by the shape of the third infralabial (as long as the third supralabial in A. metallurga sp. nov. and about 1.5–2 times longer than the third supralabial in A. silvestrii), and color pattern (dark brown dorsally and ventrally in A. silvestrii). Additionally, A. metallurga sp. nov. usually presents a postmalar row (see Table I for exceptions), absent in A. silvestrii.Specimens of A. darwinii, A. heterozonata and A. trachura usually present four precloacal pores, but some A. darwinii and A. heterozonata have two or three and some A. trachura have three pores, as in A. metallurga sp. nov. In this case, A. metallurga sp. nov. can be distinguished from A. darwinii, A. heterozonata and A. trachura by the color pattern. Dorsally, preserved specimens of those three species are dark brown, while A. metallurga sp. nov. is light brown. Additionally, A. trachura presents a tuberculate caudal tip, absent in specimens of the new species, and A. heterozonata has a fewer number of caudal annuli (see above).Revised Diagnosis: Amphisbaena metallurga can be distinguished from A. albocingulata by having parietals shorter than frontals (parietals as long as frontals in A. albocingulata) and the post-malar row present in 93% of known specimens (absent in A. albocingulata). Although there is an overlap in the number of midbody ventral segments in the two species, the modal value in A. albocingulata is 17, while in A. metallurga it is 14 segments.Amphisbaena metallurga can be distinguished from A. darwinii, A. heterozonata, and A. trachura by the number of midbody dorsal/ventral segments. Although there is an overlap in counts, the modal number of segments is lower in A. metallurga (range: 12–14/14–16; modal: 12/14) than in A. darwinii (range: 13–19/15–23; modal: 16/20), A. heterozonata (range: 14–24/15–28; modal: 16/18), and A. trachura (range: 14–21/16–24; modal: 16,18/22). Amphisbaena metallurga also has more caudal annuli (23–25) than A. heterozonata (13–18), and a smooth tail tip (tuberculate in A. trachura); and it is smaller than those species (maximum/mean SVL 179/151 mm in A. metallurga, 304/195 mm in A. darwinii, 277/201 mm in A. heterozonata, and 286/207 mm in A. trachura).Amphisbaena metallurga differs from A. prunicolor in color pattern (uniform dark brown, sometimes with a checkered pattern in the latter), and in the modal number of ventral segments at midbody (14 vs. 16). It differs from A. hogei by having more caudal annuli (23–25 vs. 15–19) and larger size (max/mean. SVL 179/151 mm vs. 134/112 mm [based on the type series]). Finally, it differs from A. munoai by the lower modal number of ventral segments at midbody (14 vs. 16) and the absence of a concavity in the top of head where the prefrontals meet the frontals (Costa et al. 2019).
Amphisbaena filiformis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: (1) snout rounded; (2) 328–342 body annuli; (3) absence of major fusion of head shields, being shields of dorsal, lateral and ventral head portion distincts; (4) two precloacal pores; (5) 12–14 dorsal and 14–16 ventral segments per midbody annulus; (6) autotomic site between 9–10th caudal annuli; (7) absent of chevron-shaped anterior body annuli; (8) precloacals pores arranged in a continuous series of the precloacal half-annuli; (9) 20–23 caudal annuli; (10) distinct dorsal sulci; (11) head slightly thiner than trunk; (12) tail tip slightly compressed; and (13) postmalar row absent.Comparisons. Amphisbaena filiformis is a small to medium species (232 mm of maximum snout-vent length) and slender body shape and can be distinguished the other South American amphisbaenians species by a combination of characters. Differs from Amphisbaena acrobeles (Ribeiro, Castro-Mello & Nogueira, 2009), Amphisbaena anomala, Amphisbaena bilabialata, Amphisbaena kingii (Bell, 1833), Leposternon cerradensis Ribeiro, Vaz-Silva and Santos-Jr, 2008, Leposternon infraorbitale (Berthold, 1859), Leposternon kisteumacheri Porto, Soares & Caramaschi, 2000, Leposternon maximus Ribeiro, Nogueira, Cintra, Silva Jr. & Zaher, 2011, Leposternon microcephalum Wagler, 1824, Leposternon octostegum (Duméril & Duméril, 1851), Leposternon polystegum (Duméril & Duméril, 1851), Leposternon scutigerum (Hemprich, 1820), Leposternon wuchereri (Peters, 1879), Mesobaena huebneri Mertens, 1925 and Mesobaena rhachicephala Hoogmoed, Pinto, Rocha & Pereira, 2009 mainly by having snout rounded in profile and dorsal view (vs. snout shovel-like or compressed forming a sharp and prominent keel) (see details of cited species in original descriptions and studies of Gans 1971a; Gans 1971b; Mott et al. 2008; Hoogmoed et al. 2009; Ribeiro et al. 2009; Ribeiro 2010).It differs from all others Amphisbaena species with rounded snout, except of A. supernumeraria Mott, Rodrigues & Santos, 2009 by having more than 327 body annuli (vs. less than 287 annuli). Differs from A. supernumeraria by having rostral, nasal prefrontals and frontals shields distinct (vs. a single large scale corresponding to those scales); two precloacals pores (vs. four); 14−16 ventral segments per midbody annulus (vs. 17–18); and conspicuous autotomic site between 9–10th caudal annuli (vs. discrete autotomic site between 10–12th caudal annuli). It also differs from A. supernumeraria by not having the anteriormost body annuli chevron-shaped (vs. anteriormost annuli chevron-shaped).Furthermore, the new species can be specifically distinguished from other known South American species of Amphisbaena with two precloacals pores (see details of meristic and morphometric characters in Table 1) by having rounded snout (vs. depressed snout in A. anomala; compressed in A. bilabialata; and slightly compressed in A. absaberi, A. carli and A. roberti); 328–342 body annuli (vs. less than 265 annuli or more than 353 annuli); two precloacals pores arranged in a continuous series of the precloacal half-annuli (vs. precloacals pores with a median hiatus in A. absaberi, A. carli and A. hiata; and disposed in the lateral of cloaca in A. anomala); 20–23 caudal annuli (vs. less than 19 in A. absaberi, A. anomala, A. bilabialata, A. brevis, A. carli, A. dubia, A. heterozonata, A. hiata, A. leeseri and A. neglecta); 12–14 dorsal segments in midbody half-annulus (vs. 10 in A. caiari and A. crisae; and more than 15 in A. absaberi, A. brevis, A. anomala, A. bilabialata, A. carli and A. hiata); 14–16 ventral segments in midbody half-annulus (vs. 10 in A. caiari and A. crisae; and more than 17 in A. carli, A. heterozonata and A. hiata); distinct dorsal sulci (vs. absent in A. anaemariae, A. anomala, A. bilabialata, A. brevis, A. carli, A. crisae, A. darwini, A. heterozonata, A. hiata, A. leeseri, A. lumbricalis and A. mitchelli). Additionally, Amphisbaena filiformis differs from other species two-pored by having head slightly thiner than trunk (vs. strongly smaller in A. absaberi, A. carli, A. cuiabana and A. roberti); autotomic site between 9–10th caudal annuli (vs. between 3–4th in A. anomala, 4–6th in A. neglecta and A. silvestrii; 6–8th in A. bilabialata and A. persephone, 6–7th in A. mitchelli; and 7–8th in A. miringoera and A. roberti); tail tip slightly compressed (vs. rounded in A. anaemariae, A. anomala, A. brevis, A. caiari, A. carli, A. crisae, A. darwini, A. dubia, A. heterozonata, A. hiata, A. leeseri, A. lumbricalis, A. miringoera, A. mitchelli, A. neglecta and A. silvestrii; and hardly compressed A. absaberi, A. bilabialata, A. cuiabana and A. roberti); and postmalar row absent (vs. present in A. carli, A. darwini, A. heterozonata, A. hiata, A. leeseri and A. silvestrii) (Ribeiro et al. 2016).
Zygaspis maraisi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Similar to other species of Zygaspis, the diagnostic feature of Z. maraisi sp. nov. is its extensive black pigmentation, with only the chin area being white (Z. nigra, the only partly-coloured species, develops increasing black pigment as it grows, but adults have only the anterior 90% of each dorsal segment black, while no ventral segments are more than 50% black). It agrees with the Z. quadrifrons complex in having paired discrete preoculars. The new species further differs from Z. nigra, in having the third supralabial followed by two temporals and two post-supralabials. It differs from most Z. quadrifrons in having body annuli less than 200. It differs from Z. kafuensis in lacking a short blind sulcus extending from the rear edge of the nasal towards the nostril. It differs from Z. ferox in having only 32 segments in a mid-body annulus, and being more slender, with a smaller head. It differs from Z. dolichomenta in having the post- mental barely longer than the mental.Loveridge (1941) recorded 221–242 body annuli in Zygaspis [Amphisbaena] q. quadrifrons and 198–221 in A. q. capensis (now synonymised with Z. quadrifrons), and these figures were repeated by Fitzsimons (1943), who reported an ‘overlap’ between the two subspecies in the Kalahari. Jacobsen (1989) recorded 190–228 (mostly 200–220) body annuli for Z. quadrifrons in the North-West and Limpopo Provinces (for- merly Transvaal). Broadley and Broadley (1997) recorded 195–245 (usually 207–245) body annuli for Z. quadrifrons throughout its range (N = 982).
Leposternon mineiro	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis (Characters of Others Species in Parentheses). Leposternon mineiro sp. nov. is a medium-sized amphisbaenian, largest specimen total length 366.8 mm, and differs from all other South American amphisbaenians, except Leposternon spp. and Amphisbaena anomala (Barbour, 1914) in having only the frontal portion of facial section of head depressed (Fig. 1B), pectoral shields with an irregular form, and dermal annuli not regularly arranged (Fig. 2A) (head compressed or rounded and pectoral shields arranged in regular annuli). It differs from A. anomala mainly by having the rostral and nasals fused into a single shield, with nostrils opening on the ventral surface of snout (Fig. 1C) and autotomic site absent (nasals distinct of rostral and autotomic site present). Leposternon mineiro sp. nov. can be distinguished from all congeners, except L. cerradensis, L. kisteumacheri, L. maximus, and L. polystegum, in having two precloacal pores and pectoral shields that are mostly diamond shaped (Fig. 2A) (pores and mostly diamond-shaped pectoral shields absent in L. bagual, L. infraorbitale, L. microcephalum, L. octostegum, L. scutigerum, and L. wuchereri; Table 1). The new species differs from unpored Leposternon species by the following combination of morphological characters (Table 1). Pholidosis and body coloration: two supralabials (three in L. infraorbitale and one in L. octostegum); three infralabials (one in L. octostegum and L. scutigerum; two in L. infraorbitale and L. microcephalum); rostronasal and azygous shields in contact (separated in L. infraorbitale and L. microcephalum); 277–300 dorsal postpectoral half-annuli (< 264 in L. bagual, L. microcephalum, and L. wuchereri; > 352 in L. octostegum); 270–280 ventral postpectoral half-annuli (< 255 in L. bagual, L. microcephalum, and L. wuchereri; and > 340 in L. octostegum); 15–16 tail annuli (< 15 in L. bagual, L. infraorbitale, L. microcephalum, L. octostegum, L. scutigerum, and L. wuchereri); 26–30 dorsal segments in midbody half-annulus (16– 19 in L. wuchereri); 24–39 ventral segments in midbody half-annulus (16–21 in L. wuchereri); adult specimens in preservative with dorsal portion of body whitish (yellow in L. infraorbitale and L. scutigerum; dark brown in L. bagual and L. microcephalum). Skull: five premaxillary teeth (seven in L. microcephalum; one in L. octostegum and L. scutigerum), three maxillary teeth (four in L. bagual, L. infraorbitale, and L. microcephalum; five in L. scutigerum); six dentary teeth (five in L. octostegum and L. scutigerum; four or five in L. wuchereri); premaxillary dorsal and ventral foramina absent (present in L. bagual, L. infraorbitale, L. microcephalum, and L. wuchereri; details in Gans and Montero, 2008, and Ribeiro, 2010). Morphometrics: rostronasal length 24.4–28.7% of head length (rostral longer in L. infraorbitale and L. octostegum; shorter in L. bagual); rostronasal width 57.5–72.1% of maximum width of head (rostral wider in L. scutigerum); azygous shield length 36.2– 40.6% of head length (azygous longer in L. wuchereri; shorter in L. bagual); azygous shield width 27.4–40.5% of maximum width of head (azygous wider in L. octostegum and L. wuchereri); prefrontals length 36.8–40.2% of head length (longer prefrontals in L. microcephalum and L. wuchereri; shorter in L. bagual); prefrontals width 24.5–35.8% of maximum width of head (prefrontals wider in L. wuchereri; shorter in L. bagual); frontals length 19.2–23.7% of head length (frontals longer in L. wuchereri and L. bagual); temporal length 24.8–29.9% of head length (temporal longer in L. microcephalum and in L. wuchereri; shorter in L. bagual); midbody width 2.2–2.6% of snout–vent length (midbody wider in L. bagual and infraorbitale); and tail length 5.2– 6.5% of snout–vent length (tail longer in L. octostegum) (Table 1).Additionally, L. mineiro sp. nov. differs from other species of genus with precloacal pores in having three infralabials (two in L. cerradensis and L. polystegum); rostronasal and azygous shields in contact (separated by an irregular shield in L. polystegum); azygous shield with anterior margin almost straight (anterior margin rounded in L. kisteumacheri); 277–300 dorsal postpectoral half-annuli (> 290 in L. cerradensis and L. maximus; < 272 in L. kisteumacheri); 270–280 ventral postpectoral half-annuli (> 300 in L. cerradensis and L. maximus; < 260 in L. kisteumacheri); 15–16 tail annuli (12–14 in L. kisteumacheri); 26–30 dorsal segments in midbody half-annulus (> 31 in L. cerradensis); adult specimens in preservative with dorsal portion of body whitish (yellow in L. polystegum); three maxillary teeth (two in L. polystegum; four in L. cerradensis and L. kisteumacheri); six dentary teeth (five in L. polystegum); azygous shield length 36.2–40.6% of head length (azygous shorter in L. polystegum); prefrontals length 36.8–40.2% of head length (prefrontals longer in L. maximus and L. wuchereri); frontals length 19.2–23.7% of head length (frontals longer in L. kisteumacheri and L. polystegum); and tail length 5.2–6.5% of snout–vent length (tail longest in L. polystegum) (Table 1).
Amphisbaena hoogmoedi	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena hoogmoedi sp. nov. is a medium-sized amphisbaenid (291 mm maximum snout-vent length), and can be distinguished from its congeners by the following combination of characters (see details in Appendix II): (1) snout convex in profile view, sligthly compressed not keeled; (2) pectoral scales arranged in regular annuli; (3) conspicuous autotomic site between 7th–8th caudal annuli; (4) 247–252 dorsal half-annuli; (5) 27 caudal annuli; (6) tail length representing 9.5–10.4% of snout-vent length; (7) four precloacal pores arranged in sequence, (8) three supralabials, (9) a rounded tail, (10) 22–24 dorsal segments in midbody half-annulus; (11) postmalar row absent; (12) head length 2.1–2.9% of snout-vent length; (13) prefrontals length 46.6–49.5% of head length; (14) prefrontals suture length 38–44.6% of head length; (15) small malar length 10.6–13.4% of head length; (16) second infralabial length 33.8–38.5% of head length; (17) ventral length of head 2.7–2.9% of snout-vent length; (18) mouth length 80.2–81.8% of head length; (19) third infralabial length 16.4–19.6% of head length; (20) snout length 62.5–78.6% of head length; (21) ocular length 23.4–26.2% of head length; (22) mental length 23.2–25.4% of head length; (23) postmental length 27.2–31.3% of head length; (24) frontals suture length 23.4–32.3% of head length; (25) postocular width 25–31.9% of maximun width of head; (26) first supralabial length 24.9–30.6% of head length; (27) second supralabial length 27.7–30% of head length; and (28) second supralabial height 26.9–28.8% of maximun head height.Comparisons with other species. Amphisbaena sp. nov. is diagnosed of all other South American amphisbaenians by combination of characters. Differs from Amphisbaena acrobeles (Ribeiro, Castro-Mello & Nogueira, 2009), A. bilabialata (Stimson, 1972), A. kingii (Bell, 1833), A. anomala (Barbour, 1914), Mesobaena huebneri Mertens, 1925; M. rhachicephala Hoogmoed, Pinto, Rocha & Pereira, 2009; and all Leposternon species, mainly in having the snout convex in profile view, sligthly compressed not keeled (vs. snout hardly compressed forming a sharp and prominent keel or snout depressed shovel-like). Differs from A. anomala and all Leposternon species by having pectoral scales arranged in regular annuli (vs. pectoral scales with an irregular form, and dermal annuli not regularly arranged).Amphisbaena sp. nov. differs all other South American amphisbaenians, except A. absaberi, A. arenaria, A. bahiana, A. bedai, A. borelli, A. brasiliana, A. carli, A. cuiabana, A. ignatiana, A. kraoh, A. roberti, A. saxosa, and A. steindachneri (Appendix II), mainly in having snout slightly compressed not keeled (vs. snout not compressed and rounded). Differs from A. bahiana, A. brasiliana, A. carli, A. kraoh, and A. saxosa mainly by having 247–252 dorsal half-annuli, 27 caudal annuli and a tail length representing 9.5–10.4% of to snout-vent length (vs. less than 247 or more than 252 dorsal half-annuli, less than 27 caudal annuli and less than 9.5). Differs from Amphisbaena absaberi in having 247–252 dorsal half-annuli, four precloacal pores arranged in sequence, and conspicuous autotomic site between 7th–8th caudal annuli (vs. 239–242 dorsal half-annuli, two precloacal pores separated by cloacal segments, and autotomic site between 5th–6th caudal annuli), head length 2.1–2.9% of snout-vent length (vs. 3.2–4.2%). Differs from Amphisbaena arenaria and A. bedai in having four precloacal pores arranged in sequence and three supralabials (vs. two pairs of pre-cloacal pores separated by two medial segments extending from the cloacal plate and four supralabials). Differs from A. borelli, A. roberti and A. steindachneri in having a rounded tail and 22–24 dorsal segments at midbody (vs. a keeled tail tip and less than 20 dorsal segments at midbody). Differs from A. cuiabana and A. ignatiana mainly in having 247–252 dorsal half-annuli, 27 tail annuli (vs. 278–309 and 15–20, and 255–263 and 15–20, respectively), prefrontals length 46.6–49.5% of head length (vs. 36.7–45% and 32,7%, respectively), prefrontals suture length 38–44.6% of head length (vs. 30.5–36.7% and 30%, respectively), small malar length 10.6–13.4% of ventral length of head (vs. 1.1–8.3% and 4.5%, respectively), second infralabial length 33.8–38.5% of head length (vs. 11–32% and 26.3%, respectively). In addition, it differs from A. cuiabana mainly in having ventral length of head 2.7–2.9% of snout-vent length (vs. 1.8–2.5%), mouth length 80.2–81.8% of head length (vs. 57.9–65.4%), and third infralabial length 16.4–19.6% of head length (vs. 6.8–12%). Differs from A. ignatiana mainly in having four precloacal pores, three supralabials and postmalar row absent (vs. six precloacal pores, four supralabials and postmalar row present), snout length 62.5–78.6% of head length (vs. 51%), ocular length 23.4–26.2% of head length (vs. 46.5%), mental length 23.2–25.4% of ventral length of head (vs. 19.5%), postmental length 27.2–31.3% of ventral length of head (vs. 19.5%), frontals suture length 23.4–32.3% of head length (vs. 36.4%), tail length 9.5–10.4% of snout-vent length (vs. 11.6%), postocular width 25–31.9% of maximun width of head (vs. 34.7%), first supralabial length 24.9–30.6% of head length (vs. 19.7%), second supralabial length 27.7–30% of head length (vs. 13.3%) and second supralabial height 26.9–28.8% of maximun head height (vs. 39.6%).
Amphisbaena kiriri	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Definition. Amphisbaena kiriri sp. nov. is identified by the following combination of characters: 1) head round-shaped; 2) nasal suture >< frontal suture > prefrontal suture; 3) two precloacal pores without a median hiatus; 4) 158–165 body annuli; 5) three to four lateral annuli; 6) 12–14 caudal annuli; 7) autotomy on third or fourth caudal annulus; 8) tail tip rounded; 9) 14–16 dorsal segments on midbody annulus; 10) 15–16 ventral segments on midbody annulus; 11) four supralabials; 12) three infralabials; 13) one row of postgenials; 14) postmalar row present; 15) dorsal and ventral sulci absent, lateral sulcus present; 16) rostral, nasals, first supralabial, and (sometimes) anterior part of prefrontals cream colored; 17) dorsum dark gray; 18) first two to three ventral segments dark gray, the rest cream colored or (at least after first third of body) cream with a dark gray half-circle at anterior border.Diagnosis: Amphisbaena kiriri sp. nov. is diagnosed from all South American amphisbaenids by the combination of two precloacal pores, 158–165 body annuli, four supralabials, and a postmalar row. The closest species in number of body annuli are A. anaemariae (156–170) and A. neglecta (151–155), which also have two precloacal pores, but three supralabials and no postmalars. The new species can be further distinguished from A. anaemariae and A. neglecta by the nasal suture longer than prefrontal suture (vs. shorter in both species) (Fig. 3 in Ribeiro et al. 2018).
Amphisbaena caetitensis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small Amphisbaena reaching up to 235 mm of total length. It is readily distinguished of its congeners by the presence of modified pointed scales on the tip of the tail visible on dorsal view, starting on the 7– 8th tail annulus; by having 186–194 body annuli; 0–2 intercalated body annuli; 10–12 tail annuli; 16 dorsal and 19–22 ventral segments on a midbody annulus (Table 1). Paired nasal, prefrontal, frontal and parietal shields in broad contact on the dorsal surface of the head; rostral shield slightly visible in dorsal view; three supralabials; three infralabials. Mental and post-mental scales present; post-mental scale followed by two rows of post-genial scales generally with two and three scales respectively. Dorsal and ventral sulci absent, lateral sulcus present, starting around the 45th annulus. Four rounded pre-cloacal pores sequentially arranged; 6–7 pre-cloacal scales and 12–14 post-cloacal scales. Autotomy site absent.Comparison with other species. Characters from other species are in parenthesis. The presence of a modified tail distinguish the new species from all South American amphisbaenids, except Amphisbaena uroxena. The round head distinguish the new species from A. bagual Ribeiro, Santos & Zaher, 2015; A. cerradensis (Ribeiro, Vaz-Silva & Santos-Jr., 2008); A. infraorbitale (Bertold, 1859), A. kisteumacheri (Porto, Soares & Caramaschi, 2000); A. maxima (Ribeiro, Nogueira, Cintra, Silva-Jr. & Zaher, 2011); A. microcephala (Wagler, 1824); A. octostega (Duméril, 1851); A. polystega (Duméril, 1851); A. scutigera (Hemprich, 1820) and A. wuchereri (Peters, 1879) (shovel head). This character also distinguishes the new species from A. acrobeles (Ribeiro, Catro-Mello & Nogueira, 2009); A. bilabialata (Stimson, 1972), A. kingii (Bell, 1833), Mesobaena huebneri Mertens, 1925 and M. rhachicephala Hoogmoed, Pinto, da Rocha & Pereira, 2009 (keeled head).The presence of four precloacal pores diagnose the new species from A. anaemariae Vanzolini, 1997; A. brevis Strussmann & Mott, 2009; A. caiari Teixeira Jr, dal Vechio, Neto & Rodrigues, 2014; A. carli Pinna, Mendonça, Bocchiglieri & Fernandes, 2010; A. crisae Vanzolini, 1997; A. dubia Muller, 1924; A. filiformis Ribeiro, Gomes, Rodrigues da Silva, Cintra & da Silva, 2016; A. hiata Montero & Céspedez, 2002; A. leeseri Gans, 1964a; A. maranhensis Gomes & Maciel, 2012; A. metallurga Costa, Resende, Teixeira, Vechio & Clemente, 2015; A. mitchelli Procter, 1923; A. miringoera Vanzolini, 1971; A. neglecta Dunn & Piatt, 1936; A. persephone Pinna, Mendonça, Bocchiglieri & Fernandes, 2014 and A. silvestrii Boulenger, 1902 (0–3 pores). This characteristic also differentiate it from A. fuliginosa Linnaeus, 1758; A. ignatiana Vanzolini, 1991a; A. kraoh (Vanzolini, 1971); A. leucocephala Peters, 1878; A. littoralis Roberto, Brito & Ávila, 2014; A. mertensii Strauch, 1881; A. pretrei Duméril & Bibron, 1839 and A. stejnegeri Ruthven, 1922 (5–12 pores).Among the four-pored amphisbaenids, A. caetitensis sp nov. differs from A. bahiana Vanzolini, 1964; A. borelli Peracca, 1897; A. roberti Gans, 1964b; A. steindachneri Strauch, 1881 and A. polygrammica Werner, 1901 by having 186–194 body annuli (>204) and 10–12 tail annuli (>14). Moreover, it differs from all remaining species by the absence of an autotomy site, except A. alba Linnaeus, 1758; A. angustifrons Cope, 1861; A. brasiliana (Gray, 1865); A. ridleyi Boulenger, 1890; A. saxosa (Castro-Mello, 2003) and A. uroxena. The new species differs from A. alba by having 186–194 body annuli (198–248), 10–12 tail annuli (13–21), 16 dorsal segments on a midbody annulus (30–42) and 19–22 ventral segments on a midbody annulus (35–46). In the same way, A. caetitensis sp nov. differs from A. ridleyi by having 10–12 tail annuli (14–17, Table 2). It differs from A. brasiliana and A. saxosa by having 186–194 body annuli (>213), 16 dorsal segments on a midbody annulus (>18) and in the sequential disposition of the precloacal pores which are separated by an area without pores in A. brasiliana and A. saxosa (Table 2). Additionally, it also differs from both species in the shape of rostral and nasals (large rostral and reduced nasals that do not contact at midline).Furthermore, A. caetitensis sp nov. differs from all species mentioned above, except A. uroxena, by having modified conic pointed tubercles on the tip of its tail. Finally, it differs from A. uroxena by having 186–194 body annuli (199–213), and 16 dorsal segments on a midbody annulus (12–14), 19–22 ventral segments on a midbody annulus (14–15, Table 2) and snout-vent length higher than 187 mm (<173 mm).
Amphisbaena mebengokre	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: The new species is a member of the Amphisbaena silvestrii group (sensu Vanzolini 1997) and is distinguished from all congeners by the combination of the following characters: (1) snout rounded in dorsal view and slightly convex in profile view; (2) two precloacal pores; (3) 161–176 dorsal half-annuli; (4) 12–15 tail annuli; (5) 3/3 supralabials; and (6) postmalar row absent.Comparisons with other species. Amphisbaena mebengokre sp. nov. can be distinguished the other South American amphisbaenians species by a combination of characters. Differs from Amphisbaena acrobeles (Ribeiro, Castro-Mello & Nogueira, 2009); Amphisbaena anomala (Barbour, 1914); Amphisbaena bilabialata (Stimson, 1972); Amphisbaena kingii (Bell, 1833); Leposternon bagual Ribeiro, Santos-Jr & Zaher, 2015; Leposternon cerradensis Ribeiro, Vaz-Silva & Santos-Jr, 2008; Leposternon infraorbitale (Berthold, 1859); Leposternon kisteumacheri Porto, Soares & Caramaschi, 2000; Leposternon maximus Ribeiro, Nogueira, Cintra, Silva Junior & Zaher, 2011; Leposternon microcephalum Wagler, 1824; Leposternon mineiro Ribeiro, Silveira & Santos-Jr, 2018; Leposternon octostegum (Duméril & Duméril, 1851); Leposternon polystegum (Duméril & Duméril, 1851); Leposternon scutigerum (Hemprich, 1820); Leposternon wuchereri (Peters, 1879); Mesobaena huebneri Mertens, 1925; and Mesobaena rhachicephala Hoogmoed, Pinto, Rocha & Pereira, 2009 mainly by having snout rounded in dorsal view and slightly convex in profile view (vs. snout shovel-like or compressed forming a sharp and prominent keel) (details of cited species in original descriptions and studies of Gans 1971a, 1971b; Mott et al. 2008; Hoogmoed et al. 2009; Ribeiro et al. 2009; Ribeiro 2010; and Ribeiro et al. 2018). It differs from all others Amphisbaena species with rounded snout, except of A. absaberi, A. anaemariae, A. brevis, A. caiari, A. carli, A. crisae, A. cuiabana, A. darwini, A. dubia, A. filiformis, A. hiata, A. kiriri, A. leeseri, A. lumbricalis, A. miringoera, A. mitchelli, A. neglecta, A. persephone, A. roberti, and A. silvestrii by having two precloacals pores. The new species differs from all Amphisbaena species with two precloacals pores, except A. anaemariae, A. crisae, A. darwini, A. kiriri and A. silvestrii by having 161–176 dorsal half-annuli (vs. less than 140 dorsal half-annuli in A. brevis, less than 154 in A. neglecta, and more than 188 dorsal half-annuli in the other species). It differs from Amphisbaena anaemariae, A. crisae, A. darwini, and A. silvestrii by having 12–15 tail annuli (vs. more than 18 tail annuli in the other species); and A. kiriri by having 3/3 supralabials and postmalar row absent (vs. 4/4 supralabials and postmalar row present).
Amphisbaena tiaraju	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena tiaraju sp. nov. is distinguished from other species of Amphisbaena by the following character combination: (1) rounded head; (2) smooth segments at the tip of the tail; (3) four pre-cloacal pores; (4) 204-221 body annuli; (5) 18-25 caudal annuli; (6) caudal autotomy seen externally from 7e9 caudal annuli; (7) presence of postmalar row; (8) 10e14 dorsal segments on the mid-body annulus; (9) distance between ocular shields representing 35%-43% of the head width; (10) dark brown colouration with uniform shield pigmentation.Comparison: Amphisbaena tiaraju sp. nov. is distinguished from A. albocingulata by presenting the post-malar row (vs. post-malar row absent). It differs from A. darwinii and A. hogei by presenting 204-221 body annuli (vs. 178-199 and 177-191 body annuli, respectively). It differs from A. heterozonata by presenting 18e25 caudal annuli (vs. 13-17 caudal annuli). It differs from A. trachura by presenting smooth scales in the tip of the tail (vs. tuberculate scales). Differs from A. nigricauda by presenting a uniform coloration in the tip of the tail (vs. a darker coloration in the tip of the tail). Differs from A. prunicolor by presenting a dark brown colouration with uniform shield pigmentation (vs. checkered pattern colouration). Differs from A. munoai by presenting a larger distance between ocular shields, varying between 35.3% and 42.7% (x = 39.5 ± 2.3) of head length (HL) (vs. 28.7-37.5, x = 32.7 ± 0.9), a dark brown uniform coloration (vs. light brown uniform coloration) and by 6.4% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance.
Amphisbaena nana	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena nana sp. nov. is distinguished from other species of Amphisbaena by the following character combination: (1) rounded head; (2) smooth segments at the tip of the tail; (3) four pre-cloacal pores; (4) 195-216 body annuli; (5) caudal autotomy seen externally from 7-10 caudal anulli; (6) presence of postmalar shields; (7) parental shields differentiated from body shields; (8) light brown coloration with uniform shield pigmentation.Comparison: Amphisbaena nana sp. nov. is distinguished from A. albocingulata by presenting the post-malar row (vs. post-malar row absent). Differs from A. hogei by presenting 195-216 body annuli (vs. 177-191 body annuli). It differs from A. heterozonata by bearing 18-22 caudal annuli (vs. 13-17 caudal annuli). It differs from A. nigricauda by having a uniform coloration on the tail tip (vs. a darker coloration on tail tip). Differs from A. trachura by presenting smooth scales on tail tip (vs. tuberculate scales). It differs from A. darwinii by presenting a slender body and small SVL in adults, 103-152mm (vs. sturdy body with long SVL in adults, 150-304 mm). Differs from A. prunicolor by presenting a uniform coloration pattern (vs. checkered coloration pattern). It differs from A. munoai by presenting a short frontal shield, with similar size of parietal shields, varying between 18.7 and 28.7% (x = 23.9 ± 2.6) of head length (HL) (vs. 25.9-35.8; x = 27.7 ± 1.0, with larger size than parietal shields) and 3.6% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance. Differs from A. tiaraju sp. nov. by presenting a smaller frontal shield, varying between 18.7 and 28.7% (x = 24.5 ± 2.8) of (HL) (vs. 28.5-34.2%; x = 30.6 ± 1.9) and by 6.9% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance.
Amphisbaena arenicola	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena arenicola sp. nov. is distinguished from other Amphisbaena by the following character combination: (1) rounded head; (2) smooth segments at the tip of the tail; (3) four pre-cloacal pores; (4) 199-216 body annuli; (5) caudal autotomy seen externally from 8-9 caudal anulli; (6) 3/3 or 4/4 supralabial shields; (7) short snout, representing less than 50% of head length.Comparison: Amphisbaena arenicola sp. nov. is distinguished from A. albocingulata by presenting the post-malar row (vs. post-malar row absent). Differs from A. hogei by presenting 199-216 body annuli (vs. 177-191 body annuli). It differs from A. heterozonata by presenting 20-22 caudal annuli (vs. 13-17 caudal annuli). It differs from A. nigricauda by having a uniformly colored tail tip (vs. a darkly colored tail tip). Differs from A. trachura by presenting smooth scales on tail tip (vs. tuberculate scales). It differs from A. darwinii by presenting a slender body and smaller adult SVL ranging between 117 and 178 mm (vs. sturdy body with long SVL in adults, 150-304 mm). Differs from A. prunicolor by presenting a uniform coloration pattern (vs. checkered coloration pattern). Differs from A. tiaraju sp. nov. by presenting a larger number of ventral segments in the midbody annulus, varying between 16 and 18 (vs. 13-16) and a smaller snout, varying between 42.6 and 47.9% (x = 45.9 ± 1.9) of head length (HL) (vs. 48.5-55.8%. x = 52.4 ± 3.1 of HL). It differs from A. munoai by presenting 3/3 or 4/4 supralabial shields (vs. always 3/3 supralabial shields) and smaller nasal suture varying between 12.5 and 17.2% (x = 14.7 ± 1.5) of HL (vs. 14.1-20.8, x = 17.6 ± 1.5 of HL). It differs from A. nana sp. nov. by presenting a widened ocular shield, with larger size than ocular shield, varying between 22,0 and 24,4% (x = 23.1 ± 0.9) of head length (HL) (vs. 17.7-22.8; x = 21.3 ± 1.3; with similar size of the ocular shield) and by 3.4% of 16S rDNA mean genetic distance.
Amphisbaena longinqua	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: (1) Small species (holotype: SVL = 134 mm), (2) two precloacal pores, arranged in a continuous series; (3) snout rounded in profile and dorsal view; (4) body annuli 232; (5) caudal annuli 27; (6) autotomy site at the 7th caudal annulus; (7) 16 dorsal and 18 ventral segments per annulus at midbody; (8) 3 supralabials; (9) 3 infralabials, second the largest; (10) 2 rows of postgenials; (11) postmalar row absent; (12) head without major scale fusions; (13) lateral sulcus present; (14) dorsal and ventral sulci absent.Comparison with other species. Meristic characters are presented in Table 1. In the description below, characters from other species are presented in parenthesis. Among the South American two-pored Amphisbaena species, the rounded snout immediately distinguishes the new species from A. cerradensis (Ribeiro et al., 2008), A. maxima (Ribeiro et al., 2012) (dorsoventrally compressed, shovellike snout), and A. bilabialata (Stimson, 1972) (laterally compressed, with a conspicuous vertical keel). The number of precloacal pores in A. acrobeles is unknown (Ribeiro et al., 2009), but its snout also ends in an extensive vertical keel. The rounded tail diagnoses the new species from A. absaberi (Strüssmann and Carvalho, 2001), A. bahiana, A. roberti Gans, 1964 (a sharp terminal vertical keel on tail), A. leeseri Gans, 1964, and A. bilabialata (a blunt terminal vertical keel). The presence of two pores arranged in a continuous series distinguishes the new species from A. absaberi, A. anomala (Barbour, 1914), A. bilabialata, A. carli Pinna et al., 2010, A. cerradensis, A. hiata Montero and Céspedez, 2002, and A. maxima (scales bearing pores separated from each other by one or more non-pored scales).Among the remaining two-pored, South American species of Amphisbaena, the 232 body annuli distinguish the new species from A. anaemariae, A. brevis Strüssmann and Mott, 2009, A. crisae, A. darwinii Duméril and Bibron, 1839, A. heterozonata Burmeister, 1861, A. metallurga Costa et al., 2015, A. mitchelli Procter, 1923, A. neglecta Dunn and Piatt, 1936, and A. silvestrii (139–220, in combination), and from A. caiari Teixeira Jr. et al., 2014, A. filifor‐ mis Ribeiro et al., 2016, and A. miringoera Vanzolini, 1971 (233–342, in combination). The number of caudal annuli (27) differs from all species (< 26) except A. mitchelli (26– 29). The presence of the autotomic site at caudal annulus 7 differs from A. anaemariae, A. brevis, A. crisae, A. dubia Müller, 1924, A. filiformis, A. leeseri, and A. neglecta (autotomy site absent or anterior to caudal annulus 6). The combined presence of 16 dorsal and 18 ventral segments per annuli differs from all species (10–15 and 10–20 ventral segments, in combination), except A. darwinii, A. du‐ bia, and A. heterozonata (13–19 dorsal and 16–22 ventral segments, in combination).
Amphisbaena mongoyo	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: (1) A small species (holotype SVL = 141 mm), (2) four precloacal pores arranged in a continuous series; (3) snout rounded in profile and dorsal view; (4) body annuli 208; (5) caudal annuli 25; (6) autotomy site at the 10th caudal annuli; (7) 14 dorsal and 16 ventral segments per annulus at midbody; (8) three supralabials; (9) three infralabials, second the largest; (10) two rows of postgenials; (11) postmalar row absent; (12) head without major scale fusions; (13) lateral sulcus present; (14) dorsal and ventral sulci absent.Comparison with other species. Meristic characters are presented in Table 1. In the description below, characters from other species are presented in parenthesis. Among the South American four-pored Amphisbaena species, the rounded snout immediately distinguishes the new species from A. cerradensis and A. kingii (Bell, 1833) (snout ventrally and laterally compressed, respectively). The number of precloacal pores in A. acrobeles is unknown, but its snout also ends in an extensive vertical keel. The presence of four pores arranged in a continuous series distinguishes the new species from A. arenaria Vanzolini 1991b, A. bedai Vanzolini 1991b, A. brasiliana (Gray, 1865), and A. saxosa (Castro-Mello, 2003) (four pores grouped in two series, separated at midline by non-pored scales).Among the remaining four-pored South American species of Amphisbaena, A. mongoyo sp. nov. can be distinguished from A. heathi Schmidt, 1936, A. hogei Vanzolini, 1950, A. ridleyi Boulenger, 1890, A. tragorrhectes Vanzolini, 1971, A. prunicolor (Cope, 1885), and A. camura Cope, 1862 by higher number of body annuli, 208 (183–206, in combination) and A. talisiae, A. cunhai Hoogmoed and Ávila-Pires, 1991, A. arda, A. carvalhoi Gans, 1965b, A. lumbri‐ calis Vanzolini, 1996, A. vermicularis Wagler, 1824, A. ibi‐ jara Rodrigues et al., 2003, A. sanctaeritae Vanzolini, 1994, A. frontalis Vanzolini, 1991b, A. hastata Vanzolini, 1991a, A. cuiabana (Strüssmann and Carvalho, 2001), and A. su‐ pernumeraria Mott et al., 2009 by lower number of annuli (218–337, in combination). It is distinguished from A. alba Linnaeus, 1758, A. albocingulata Boettger, 1885, A. angustifrons Cope, 1861, A. bahiana, A. camura, A. car‐ valhoi, A. cegei Montero et al., 1997, A. cuiabana, A. da‐ rwinii, A. gracilis Strauch, 1881, A. heterozonata, A. hogei, A. medemi Gans and Mathers, 1977, A. minuta Hulse and McCoy, 1979, A. munoai Klappenbach, 1960, A. nigricauda Gans, 1966b, A. pericensis Noble, 1920, A. plumbea Gray, 1872, A. polygrammica Werner, 1901, A. prunicolor, A. ri‐ dleyi, A. rozei Lancini, 1963, A. slateri Boulenger, 1907, A. spurrelli Boulenger, 1915, A. supernumeraria, and A. tra‐ chura Cope, 1885 by higher number of caudal annuli, 25 (12–24, in combination) and A. arda, A. cunhai, A. fronta‐ lis, A. hastata, A. heathi, A. myersi Hoogmoed, 1988, A. tra‐ gorrhectes, and A. vanzolinii Gans, 1963 by a lower number of caudal annuli (26–40, in combination).In having the autotomic site at the 10th caudal annuli, the new species can be distinguished from all species except Amphisbaena lumbricalis, A. supernumeraria, and A. vanzolinii (lower or higher values, in combinations). From A. albocingulata, A. heathi, A. hogei, A. nigricauda, A. sanctaeritae, A. talisiae, and A. tragorrhectes, it can be distinguished by higher number of dorsal segments, 14 (10–13, in combination) and A. alba, A. angustifrons, A. arda, A. bolivica Mertens, 1929, A. camura, A. cegei, A. hastata, A. medemi, A. minuta, A. myersi, A. occidentalis Cope, 1876, A. plumbea, A. polygrammica, A. ridleyi, A. ro‐ zei, A. spurrelli, and A. vermicularis by a lower number of dorsal segments, 14 (16–42, in combination). And from A. slevini Schmidt, 1936, A. sanctaeritae, A. talisiae, and A. tragorrhectes, the new species if diagnosed by higher number of ventral segments, 16 (10–14, in combination), and from A. alba, A. angustifrons, A. arda, A. bolivica, A. ca‐ mura, A. cegei, A. heathi, A. medemi, A. minuta, A. occiden‐ talis, A. plumbea, A. ridleyi, A. rozei, A. supernumeraria, A. trachura, and A. vermicularis by lower number of ventral segments, 16 (17–46, in combination).
Amphisbaena acangaoba	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Definition. A species of Amphisbaena identified by the following combination of characters: 1) head round, highly domed from rostral to frontal shields, with a prognathous snout terminating in a horizontal edge in dorsal and ventral views; 2) suture lengths: frontal > prefrontal > nasal; 3) precloacal pores, 4–8 (usually six), without median hiatus; 4) body annuli, 216–239; 5) lateral annuli, 2–4; 6) caudal annuli, 13–17; 7) caudal autotomy, absent; 8) tail tip slightly dorsally depressed; 9) dorsal segments, 18–24, and ventral segments, 18–24 at a midbody annulus (38–48 total segments); 10) supralabials, 4; 11) infralabials, 3; 12) parietals variable in size and shape; 13) postoculars, 1 or 2; 14) temporals, 1 or 2; 15) postgenials in 1 or 2 rows; 16) postmalar row present; 17) lateral sulcus present, dorsal and ventral sulci absent; 18) color (in preservative) brown with cream narrow to wide segment sutures on dorsum (sometimes giving a reticulate appearance), becoming paler toward venter, which is immaculate cream after the first to fourth segment below the lateral sulcus; tail brown dorsally and cream ventrally.Diagnosis: The combination of a round head, 4–8 precloacal pores, 216–239 body annuli, 18–24 dorsal and 18–24 ventral segments at a midbody annulus, distinguishes A. acangaoba sp. nov. from other South American amphisbaenians, except A. angustifrons, A. borelli, A. brasiliana, A. fuliginosa, A. leucocephala, A. mertensii, A. plumbea, A. pretrei, A. spurrelli, and A. vermicularis. Amphisbaena borelli, A. fuliginosa, A. leucocephala, A. pretrei, and A. spurrelli, however, present three supralabials (four in A. acangaoba sp. nov.). The number of caudal annuli (13–17) further distinguishes A. acangaoba sp. nov. from A. fuliginosa (20–30), A. leucocephala (25–29), A. mertensii (25–32), A. pretrei (21– 26), A. spurrelli (18–20), and A. vermicularis (25–35). Amphisbaena angustifrons and A. brasiliana share with A. acangaoba sp. nov. the absence of autotomic caudal annuli, although having a rounded tail tip (slightly dorsally compressed in A. acangaoba sp. nov.). Amphisbaena acangaoba sp. nov. further differs from A. angustifrons, A. fuliginosa, A. leucocephala, A. mertensii, A. pretrei, A. spurrelli, and A. vermicularis by the head highly domed (not highly domed in those species). Finally, the precloacal pores sequentially arranged distinguish A. acangaoba sp. nov. from A. brasiliana (pores interrupted by non-pore–bearing segments).
Amphisbaena elbakyanae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena elbakyanae sp. nov., can be distinguished from all its congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) three supralabial scales; (2) three infralabial scales; (3) second supralabial scale longer than first and third supralabial scales, contacting first and third supralabial, temporal, ocular and prefrontal scales; (4) angulus oris lies in transverse plane passing through the posterior edges of the ocular scales and the center of the frontal scales; (5) second infralabial scale in contact with postmental scales; (6) six premaxillar teeth; (7) ten maxillar teeth; (8) one temporal scale; (9) absence of malar scale; (10) a single postgenial scale row with four segments; (11) postmalar scale rows with six to seven segments; (12) first body annulus includes one large segment on each side lying immediately posterior to inner parietal scales, abutting onto posterolateral edge of the outer parietal scales; (13) middorsal segments of second and third body annulus non-enlarged; (14) 245–257 body annuli; (15) 13–15 dorsal segments per annulus at midbody; (16) 16–18 ventral segments per annulus at midbody; (17) four precloacal pores; (18) autotomy sites located on sixth to eighth caudal annuli, (19) 20–24 caudal annuli, (20) rostral scale visible from above, (21) dorsal and ventral surfaces homogeneusly dark brown or dark brown-reddish, (22), and small body size 211–237 mm (Torres-Ramírez et al.2021).Among all four-pored Amphisbaena species from South American, Amphisbaena cunhai, A. frontalis, A. gracilis, A. medemi, A. talisiae and A. slateri are the most similar species. Nonetheless, A. elbakyanae can be distinguished by having 245-257 body annuli (versus 226-239 in A. cunhai, 252-272 in A. frontalis, 224-248 in A. gracilis, 230-235 in A. medemi, 205-234 in A. talisiae, and 176-213 in A. slateri); 20-24 caudal annuli (versus 25-26 A. cunhai, 17-18 in A. medemi); a single postgenial scale row composed by four segments (versus two postgenial scale rows in A. medemi and A. slateri); absence of malar scales (versus a single malar scale in A. cunhai, A. slateri and A.talisiae); postmalar scale row composed by six to seven segments (versus nine segments in A. medemi); rostral scale visible from above (versus rostral scale non-visible from above in A. gracilis. Fig. 3A-B), first body annulus includes one large segment on each side lying immediately posterior to inner parietal scales, abutting onto posterolateral edge of the outer-parietal scales (versus first body annulus including two or three, large segments on each side lying immediately posterior to inner parietal scales, abutting onto posterolateral edge of the outer parietal scales in A. gracilis, Fig. 3A-B); middorsal segments of second and third body annuli non-enlarged (versus three or four middorsal segments of second and third body annuli enlarged in A. gracilis, Fig. 3A-B) and angulus oris lies in transverse plane that passes through posterior edges of the ocular scales and center of frontal scales [versus angulus oris lies in transverse plane that passes through posterior edges of the postocular scales and center of parietal scales in A. gracilis, Fig. 3E-F (Gonzalez and Gans 1971)]. Additionally, Amphisbaena elbakyanae can be distinguished from A. mertensii (one of phylogenetically closely related species, Fig. 1) by having four pre-cloacal pores and 245-257 body annuli (versus 6-8 and 210-250 in A. mertensii, respectively). Comparisons with the remaining four-pored Amphisbaena species are summarized in Table 2. (Torres-Ramírez et al. 2021).Color in life: Dorsal and ventral surfaces from dark brown to dark brown-reddish; occipital, parietal, frontal, temporal, third supralabial, third infralabial, postmental scales, as well as postgenial and postmalar scale rows dark brown highly pigmented; rostral, prefrontal, ocular, nasal, first and second supralabial, mental and first infralabial scales dark brown faded (Torres-Ramírez et al. 2021).Comparisons: Amphisbaena elbakyanae can be distinguished from it by having rostral scale visible from above (versus rostral scale non-visible from above in A. gracilis. Fig. 3A-B), first body annulus includes one large segment on each side lying immediately posterior to inner parietal scales, abutting onto posterolateral edge of the outer-parietal scales (versus first body annulus including two or three, large segments on each side lying immediately posterior to inner parietal scales, abutting onto posterolateral edge of the outer parietal scales in A. gracilis, Fig. 3A-B); middorsal segments of second and third body annuli non-enlarged (versus three or four middorsal segments of second and third body annuli enlarged in A. gracilis, Fig. 3A-B) and angulus oris lies in transverse plane that passes through posterior edges of the ocular scales and center of frontal scales [versus angulus oris lies in transverse plane that passes through posterior edges of the postocular scales and center of parietal scales in A. gracilis, Fig. 3E-F (Gonzalez and Gans 1971)] (Torres-Ramírez et al. 2021).
Monopeltis mauricei	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Description. Two large shields covering the head, the anterior once and a half times as long as the posterior; a pair of occipitals; no preocular; ocular small, eye indistinguishable; rostral separating the nasals, not bordering the nostrils; nasals elongate, reaching the ocular; 3 upper labials, third largest; mental small; postmental large, pentagonal, in contact with anterior lower labial; 2 chin shields, in contact with all 3 lower labials; 289 annuli on body, 12 on tail; 70 (40 + 30) segments in a midbody annulus, the 2 median ventral segments two and a half times as broad as long; 6 pectorals; 4 anals; 1-1 preanal pores. (Loveridge 1941) Dentition. Premaxillary tooth 1; maxillaries 1-1; mandibulars 6-6. (Loveridge 1941) Measurements. Total length 132 (127 + 5) mm. (Loveridge 1941) Diagnosis. A small to medium-sized (220 to 365 mm. snout-vent length in adults) slender form of Monopeltis with the dorsal surface immaculate or marked by only a diffuse speckling of melanophores. Specimens have 276 to 316 body, four to seven lateral and eight to 12 (generally nine or 10) caudal annuli (up to the smoothly rounded caudal tip, that may be slightly compressed laterally), 30 to 42 dorsal plus 16 to 29 (generally 20, 22, or 24) ventral segments to a midbody annulus and two (very rarely three Or four) large first, plus three to seven (generally five) segments to the second postgenial row. The azygous head shields are discrete in some juveniles, whereas others retain short blind lateral sutures. Larger specimens lack even lateral notches for the oculars in the strongly keratinized head shield. The nasals do not contact each other or the lip; their elongate posterior processes (sometimes broken off to form postnasals) always contact the quadrangular ocular. There are four to six parietals. The pectoral region is long and slender. The medial pair of the six slender shields (which correspond dorsally to four or five body annuli) is the longest and extends anteriorly so that the narrowed last prepectoral annulus makes a short radius curve round it. The lateral sulci are often poorly expressed and dorsal and ventral ones are absent. There are diagonal folding lines on the dorsum. Many specimens have no supernumerary dorsal half-annuli; the maximum number is 16, but there may be a reduction of up to seven half-annuli. The dorsal interannular sutures Cross the trunk at right angles to its long axis. Two large precloacal pores lie on the terminal segments of the first lateral annulus, which are in contact with the large median pair of precloacal shields. No autotomy occurs. (Broadley et al. 1976)Description. This is a medium-sized form of Monopeltis with the available specimens ranging from 105 to 365 mm. snout-vent length (fig. 20). The dorsal surface may have a diffuse sprinkling of melanophores, but is more often immaculate. The dorsal surface of the head is divided into two discrete azygous shields in some juveniles, whereas others retain short blind lateral sutures. Larger specimens have strongly keratinized head shields with no lateral sutures or indentations for the oculars. The head shield may be distinctly convex in profile, but is more often slightly convex posteriorly and concave anteriorly. In juveniles the eye can be distinguished deep beneath the anterior end of an elongate, curved striplike ocular, which is in contact anteriorly with both a small postnasal (sometimes fused with the nasal) and the second supralabial, whereas posteriorly it contacts the medial pair of four to six parietals. A triangular subocular shield is wedged between it and the third supralabial. The nostrils are crescent-shaped and inserted in elongate nasal scales that are in contact (or fused) with the postnasals, but separated from the lip and each other. There are three supralabials. The lower jaw is formed by pentagonal mental, first, second (very small), and enormous third infralabials and a shield shaped postmental (genial). Posterior to the postmental are one (rarely two) pair(s) of large first postgenials in broad median contact, followed by three to seven (generally five) small second postgenials. The modified pectoral region extends to the eighth to eleventh dorsal annulus. There are six elongate segments; those of the medial pair are widest posteriorly and taper anteriorly, where they project into the prepectoral annulus, the midventral segments of which make a short radius curve around them. There are 276 to 316 body annuli from the posterior edge of the third infralabial up to (but not including) the precloacal shields. Supernumerary dorsal half-annuli are generally few, but reach a maximum of 16 in TM 42411, whereas other specimens show a reduction in dorsal half-annuli of up to seven. A midbody annulus has 30 to 42 dorsal plus 16 to 29 ventral segments. The middorsal segments are approximately five times as long as wide and midventral segments are approximately one and a-half times as wide as long. The number of dorsal segments is always much greater (nearly twice) than the number of ventral segments for any given specimen. There are four to seven lateral half-annuli, the enlarged outer or penultimate segments of the first half-annulus each bear a precloacal pore and are usually in contact with both pairs of pre-cloacal shields (rarely fused with the outer pair). The very short tail is smoothly rounded and appears subcylindrical in cross section although often showing dorsal and ventral grooves. There are seven to 10 caudal annuli with no autotomy. The segments of the caudal cap tend to be fused. The lateral sulci are ill defined and there are no dorsal or ventral sulci. There are diagonal folding lines on the dorsal surface of the body. (Broadley et al. 1976)
