Ablepharus bivittatus	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Four longitudinal rows of scales on dorsum; 22-25 scales around midbody; palpebral circle complete, with three enlarged granules on upper border, separating supraoculars from eye; three supraoculars, two in contact with frontal; three temporal plates in first row behind eye; prefrontals large, usually forming median suture and separating frontal from frontonasal; two frontoparietals; nasal semidivided; four upper labials in front of subocular. (Fuhn, 1969: 27; Eremchenko and Szczerbak, 1986: 70, Anderson 1999: 264).Coloration: Body and tail bronze-olive above, in preservative, cinnamon brown in life, with darker spots with light central shaft, or each scale of back with two to three short dark marks; dark stripe, edged above and below with white, along entire body, through eye, from nostril; limbs same ground color as body with darker markings tending to form stripes; venter greenish white (Anderson 1999: 264).
Ablepharus grayanus	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Body slender shorter the tail moderately depressed. Snout obtuse; rostral reaches the top of the head and it is broader than high; anterior frontal single hexagonal broadly in contact with the rostral; but narrowly with the vertical; posterior frontal separated; each a little smaller than anterior frontal; and in contact with a small shield on the upper anterior angle of the eye; vertical elongate, subquadrangular, posterior sides the longer ones; three superciliary shields, followed by two small ones, obliquely descending on the two temporal regions; anterior occipital single, pentagonal, pointed in the front, and behind forming a suture with a small suboval median. The number of scales around the body is, therefore, generally only 26 and 28 and rarely 30. Occipital behind which the two elongated occipital also forms a suture; nasal single, lateral, followed by the postnasal; one elongately quadrangular loreal; two rows of the small shield along the anterior upper and posterior edge of the eye; one small postocular followed a little higher up by a large temporal, in contact with the last upper labial and the post occipital; a few enlarged shields behind the occipitals; 18-20 longitudinal rows of scales around the middle of the body, and 36-38 transverse rows between fore and the hind limbs; 7 upper labials, the 5th longest, under the eye,  the last highest; 6 lower labials; first chin shield single, followed by the 3 pairs of which only the first forms a suture; two perineal shields enlarged; subcaudals in one row, enlarged, and very numerous. The fore-limb when laid forward reached the angle of the mouth, the hind-limb is three-fifths the distance between it and the fore-limb (contributed by Dikansh Parmar, 25 March 2022).Coloration: Colour, above,  olive green, with a very distinct metallic luster, a little darker at the sides, speckled with black and gradually passing into the uniform greenish-white lower side; the shields on the head with faint dark markings; a sliver green narrow bandpasses from the superciliary edge to the base of the tail, it is edged with black below, but gradually lost on the tail, which is paler than the body with the pink tinge. Limbs brown above marked with the rows of white spots, the Lower portion of upper labials white. The larger of to specimens measures;  2.8 ., inch head and body 1.25; tail 1.65; reproduced at tip; forelimb 0.3; hind-limb 0.45 inches. Only two species were procured on a sandy place between tufts of grass in the Waggur district, in the Northern-eastern part of Kacchh (contributed by Dikansh Parmar, 25 March 2022).
Ablepharus pannonicus	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis (genus): Small (snout-vent length 60 mm or less), terrestrial skinks with a long, thin post-orbital bone and an ablepharine eye; clutch and litter sizes variable, up to 7 (Greer 1974: 9).Diagnosis (species): Body slender, legs not meeting when adpressed; four longitudinal rows of scales on dorsum; two upper scales of periocular circle much enlarged; frontoparietal usually single (exceptionally, paired); prefrontals separated; four anterior supralabials; ear opening small but distinct; nasal semidivided; scale rows at midbody usually 20, rarely 18 or 22. (Fühn, 1969a: 36 -37; Eremchenko and Szczerbak, 1986:120, Anderson 1999: 264).Coloration: (Fig. 124) Olive or brownish above in preservative, with metallic gloss; dark brown dorsolateral stripe with whitish edge above; flanks with less distinct dark longitudinal lines; whitish upper lips; sides of tail with small spots regularly arranged; limbs above with light and dark longitudinal lines; whitish or brownish below. In life, ventral surface of tail and hind legs brick-red or orange during breeding. (Anderson 1999: 264)
Abronia anzuetoi	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) distinctive spinelike supra-auricular scales in subadults and adults; (2) unexpanded supranasals; (3) a median frontonasal scale; (4) posterior internasals relatively small, although about twice the length of anterior internasals; (5) discrete canthals; (6) two or three primary temporals, the lower two contacting the postoculars; (7) usually no parietal-median supraocular contact; (8) a single occipital; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, similar in length to other scales in series; (11) posterior subocular broadly separated from the lower primary temporal by the penultimate supralabial, which is the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) at least three rows of granular preauriculars; (13) postmental divided; (14) posterior infralabial elongate, often about twice as long as preceding infralabials; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 27-28 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14 dorsal longitudinal scale rows arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 14 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adults dark green or dark blue-green (fig. 11C, D); and (20) juvenile pattern unknown. This species differs from all other species of Abronia that have spinelike supra-auricular scales, except A. aurita, A. gaiophantasma, A. lythrochila, and some A. matudai, in having 14 longitudinal ventral scale rows. Abronia anzuetoi differs from all other species of Abronia, except A. aurita, A. graminea, and A. smithi, in having a distinctly yellow circumorbital region. Abronia anzuetoi differs from A. aurita in coloration (dark emerald green or dark blue green versus a paler green with yellow and/or orange markings), in having relatively longer posterior internasals, and possibly in being of a larger body size (maximum known SVL 135 mm versus 125 mm). Abronia anzuetoi differs from A. gaiophantasma in having more numerous postoccipital rows between the occipital and first nuchal row (two or three versus one), expansion of the posterior infralabial, and in a green coloration with yellow eye region (versus a brown dorsum and circumorbital region not yellow), and from A. lythrochila in having a divided postmental (usually single in A. lythrochila), and in a green dorsal coloration with yellow orbit (color variable in A. lythrochila, but often brownish or with numerous black markings, never with yellow orbit).” (Campbell & Frost 1993: 23)
Abronia aurita	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) distinctive spinelike supra-auricular scales in subadults and adults; (2) unexpanded supranasals; (3) a median frontonasal scale, usually not contacting frontal; (4) posterior internasals not greatly enlarged; (5) discrete canthals; (6) 2-5 (usually 3) primary temporals, the lower two contacting the postoculars; (7) usually no parietal-median supraocular contact; (8) a single occipital; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, similar in length to other scales in series; (11) the posterior subocular broadly separated from the lower primary temporal by the penultimate supralabial, which is the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) preauricular scales small, granular, elevated, usually disposed in 3-4 rows; (13) postmental variable, but most frequently single; (14) the posteriormost infralabial elongate, often about twice as long as preceding infralabials; (15) usually six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 27-31 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14 dorsal longitudinal scale rows, these parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 14 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adult greenish dorsal coloration with much black mottling concentrated into indistinct dorsal crossbands; (20) juvenile pattern of dark dorsal crossbands. This species differs from all other species of Abronia that have protuberant supra-auricular scales, except A. anzuetoi (fig. 11C, D), A. gaiophantasma (fig. 11A, B), some A. matudai, and A. lythrochila (fig. 11F), in having 14 longitudinal ventral scale rows. Abronia aurita differs from all other species of Abronia except A. graminea, A. anzuetoi, and A. smithi (fig. 11E) in having a distinctly yellow orbital region. Abronia aurita differs from A. anzuetoi in coloration (relatively pale green or yellow-green with yellow and/or orange markings versus dark emerald green or dark blue green), in having comparatively shorter posterior internasals, and being of a smaller size (maximum SVL 125 versus 135 mm). Abronia aurita differs from A. gaiophantasma in having more numerous postoccipital rows between the occipital and first nuchal row (two or three versus one), having multiple rows of nonimbricate preauriculars (versus two or fewer subimbricate rows), having an expanded posterior infralabial, the parietal usually in contact with the median supraoculars (not so in A. gaiophantasma), and features of color pattern. Abronia aurita differs from most specimens of A. lythrochila in having discrete canthals (versus canthals usually fused with posterior internasals) and in having a distinctly yellow circumorbital region.” (Campbell & Frost 1993: 13 and Table 1).
Abronia bogerti	Sauria	Anguidae	DEFINITION: An Abronia of the deppii group (paired postmental; no protuberant supra-auricular scales) with dorsal osteoderms developed in only a few of the anterior scale rows; a single primary temporal in contact with the orbit; penultimate supralabial in contact with the orbit; parietals broadly in contact with the medial supraoculars; anterior canthals present; about 41 transverse rows of dorsals; minimum number of scales in any single row across the nape eight (Tihen 1954).
Abronia chiszari	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: Very similar and presumably to Abronia bogerti, having 41 transverse rows of between occipital and base of tail, more than a minimum six scales in a transverse row of nuchals, parietals contacting supraocular 3 and 4, supranasals unexpanded, one temporal reaching oculars, two temporals contacting supralabials, one postsubocular supralabial, 11 dark crossbars from occiput to base of tail (as in reidi and the aurita group); differing from bogerti in having cantholoreal separated from frontonasal by contact of prefrontal and canthal, 3-3 anterior temporals, two anterior internasals, an azygous internasal between anterior and posterior pairs, superciliaries narrowly contacting or narrowly separated from prefrontal, anterior supraocular narrowly contacting or narrowly separated from cantholoreal, minimum number of nape scales in a transverse row seven. (Smith 1981)Comparisons: Smith 1981: 53
Abronia deppii	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis (genus): Abronia can be distinguished from all other gerrhonotines(Coloptychon, Gerrhonotus, Barisia, Elgaria, and Mesaspis) in the combination of having: (1) the fifth row of temporal scales absent (except, probably anomalously,on one side of one specimen of A. salvadorensis) (present in all other genera); (2)large, well-clawed limbs (smaller limbs in all other genera); and (3) a reduced lateral fold (much better developed in all other genera),particularly between the anterior limb and ear (Campbell & Frost 1993: 98).Diagnosis: This species has (1) the supraauricular scales weakly developed knob-like, having no indication of spines; (2) supranasals not expanded and not in contact at dorsal midline; (3) frontonasal usually in contact with frontal; (4) posterior internasals almost twice as long as anterior internasals (1.8); (5) no canthals;(6) three anterior temporals in each side; (7) parietal separated from supraoculars; (8) single occipital; (9) posterior head scales weakly developed knob-like; (10) anterior supercilliary not contacting the cantholoreal; (11) posterior suboccular separated from the lower primary temporal by the penultimate scale in the supralabial series; (12) preauricular scales slightly enlarged and in one row;(13) two postmentals; (14) posterior infralabials elongated; (15) preauricular scales slightly enlarged; (16) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (17) 24-28 transversal dorsal scale rows; (18) 10-12 longitudinal dorsal scale rows; (19) 12-14 longitudinal ventral scale rows; (20) six, sometimes seven, dark dorsal bands.Abronia deppii can be distinguished from the Guerrero population by weakly developed knob-like posterior head scales (Fig. 2); lower anterior temporal in broad contact with antepenultimate supralabial; azygous scale between interparietal and occipital frequently present (about 60% of cases); head width <22 mm in adult males and <18 in adult females; ratio of head width to head length <0.75 in adult males; scale whorls on tail 68-80 (x = 77); infralabial scales 7-8; preauricular scales only slightly enlarged; longitudinal dorsal scale rows 10-11; dorsum with well defined bold black crossbands, confluent and more or less symmetrical on vertebral region; dorsal head coloration with pattern of black and white irregular blotches; ventral color in adult males tends to be reddish, occasionally bright red; upper lips marked with black. Differs from other species of the subgenus Abronia (sensu Campbell and Frost, 1993) by having oblique longitudinal rows of dorsal scales, where fuscolabialis, taeniata, and graminea have parallel longitudinal scale rows,where taeniata and graminea do not; has one lowertemporal contacting postoccular series; and a single occipital, where mixteca and oaxacae have three occipitals and two primary temporals contacting postocular series; has body coloration that it is not uniformly green, where graminea is; has six nuchals, where graminea has four (only juveniles of graminea have bands on the dorsum of the body). (from Flores-Villela & Sánchez 2003: 525)
Abronia fimbriata	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “One of the most distinctive species of Abronia, having: (1) distinctive spinelike supra-auricular scales in subadults and adults; (2) expanded supranasals meeting at midline; (3) frontonasal absent; (4) posterior internasals relatively large through fusion with canthals; (5) no discrete canthals, these apparently fused with posterior internasals; (6) two or three (most frequently two [anomalous fourth on one side of the lectotype]) primary temporals, the lower two contacting postoculars; (7) parietals usually in contact with the median supraoculars; (8) a single occipital; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, similar in length to other scales in series; (11) posterior subocular in contact with the lower primary temporal or narrowly separated by the penultimate supralabial, which is the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) preauricular scales small but not protuberant, disposed in 2-3 rows; (13) postmental single; (14) posterior infralabial not elongate; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 27-30 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14 dorsal longitudinal scale rows arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) usually 12 (infrequently 14) ventral longitudinal scale rows, lateral row expanded; (19) mature adult dorsal coloration brown with much black mottling (fine vermiculation) concentrated dorsally (fig. 10D); (20) juvenile pattern of a broad pale brown middorsal stripe; subadults and young adults with brown chevron-shaped crossbands (figs. 10E, F). Abronia fimbriata consistently lacks the median frontonasal scale (figs. 6, 52); the only other species to do so (variably) are A. oaxacae (fig. 12F), in which a frontonasal is present in more than half of the known individuals, A. taeniata, in which a frontonasal is rarely absent, A. lythrochila (fig. 11F), in which one of eight specimens that we have examined lacks a frontonasal, and IBUNAM 340, which was previous identified as Gerrhonotus fimbriatus by Martín del Campo (1939) and as Abronia ochoterenai by Hartweg and Tihen (1946), Then (1954), and Casas-Andreu and Smith (*1990" [1991]). We have re-examined this specimen (IBUNAM 340) and find it to represent an undescribed species (see A. leurolepis account, following). The body of A. fimbriata (fig. 10D) is relatively elongate compared with A. aurita (fig. 10A), A. anzuetoi (fig. 11C), A. ochoterenai (fig. 14), A. leurolepis (fig. 17), and A. lythrochila (fig. 11F). This species differs from all other Abronia having spinelike supra-auricular scales, except for A. smithi, A. ochoterenai, A. leurolepis, and some A. matudai, in usually having 12 longitudinal ventral scale rows, with the lateral rows expanded. Abronia fimbriata is distinctive from these species in lacking both a frontonasal and discrete canthal scales. Other than A. fimbriata, only A. ornelasi and A. reidi exhibit large expanded supranasals that meet at the midline. In some specimens of A. matudai, the only known specimen of A. mitchelli, and one example of A. salvadorensis, the supranasals are expanded part way across the dorsum of the snout, but do not meet at the midline. All of these species lack spinelike supra-auricular scales. (Campbell & Frost 1993: 16)VARIATION: Campbell & Frost 1993: 18
Abronia fuscolabialis	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: A Gerrhonotus of the deppii group without protuberant supra-auricular scales; adult without conspicuous light areas laterally; chin moderately dark in color; lower labials as dark as the granular area of the neck, with indistinct lighter bands; approximately 30-31 rows of dorsal scales between the occipital and the posterior border of the thigh; dorsal osteoderms well developed; an upper anterior loreal present; sides of neck covered with more or less equal subgranular scales (from TIHEN 1944).
Abronia gaiophantasma	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) supra-auricular scales of subadults and adults spinelike; (2) supranasals relatively small and unexpanded, not in contact at the dorsal midline; (3) frontonasal scale present, not contacting frontal; (4) posterior internasals relatively small, only slightly larger than the anterior internasals; (5) canthals discrete; (6) three or four anterior temporals per side, usually the lower two (rarely one) contacting the postoculars; (7) parietal not in contact with median supraoculars; (8) usually a single occipital; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, similar in length to other scales in series; (11) posterior subocular broadly separated from the lower primary temporal by the penultimate supralabial, the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) two or occasionally three incomplete rows of subimbricate preauricular scales; (13) postmental single or divided; (14) posteriormost infralabial not elongate; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 28-30 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 12 dorsal longitudinal scale rows, arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 14-16 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adults tan, brown, gray-brown, or reddish brown (fig. 11A); (20) juveniles and subadults with dark brown crossbands (fig. 11 B). This species differs from other species of Abronia occurring east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in having 12 (versus 14 or more) dorsal longitudinal scale rows. Abronia gaiophantasma (fig. 11A, B) differs from all Nuclear Central American species, except A. salvadorensis, A. matudai females, and some individuals of A. lythrochila in having an essentially brown dorsal coloration, with or without dark crossbands. Abronia gaiophantasma differs from A. salvadorensis in lacking a fourth row of temporal scales, having distinct supra-auricular spines; from A. matudai in having unexpanded supranasals, in usually having 3-4 anterior temporals (versus usually 2), in having 14-16 ventral longitudinal scale rows (versus 12), iN having distinct supraauricular spinelike scales, and in lacking contact between the parietals and the median supraoculars; and from A. lythrochila in having smaller lateral neck scales, having larger scales in the temporal region, lacking multiple rows of granular preauriculars, and lacking red pigment on the upper edge of the infralabials.” (Campbell & Frost 1993: 20)VARIATION: Campbell & Frost 1993: 21
Abronia graminea	Sauria	Anguidae	Description: Postmental paired; no protuberant supra-auricular scales; dorsal osteoderms well developed over the entire body; scales of the sides of the neck relatively small; two primary temporals in contact with the orbit; the antepenultimate is the posteriormost supralabial to reach the orbit; anterior canthals lacking; four primary and three or occasionally four secondary temporals; three or four temporal elements in contact with the supralabials; 24 to 30 transverse rows of dorsals; minimum number of scales in any nuchal row usually (75%) four or five, six in 25 percent; caudal whorls 83-94; supranasals present, unexpanded; parietal separated from the medial supraoculars; adults a nearly uniform gray-green or grayish blue (in alcohol) above (Tihen 1954: 20).
Abronia leurolepis	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) distinctive spinelike supra-auricular scales in adults; (2) unexpanded supranasals; (3) no median frontonasal scale; (4) posterior internasals not greatly enlarged, in the only known specimen the one on the right fused with the canthal; (5) canthals meeting at the midline, the left discrete, the right fused with the posterior internasal; (6) three primary temporals, the lower two contacting the postoculars; (7) narrow parietal-median supraocular contact on one side in the only known specimen; (8) a single large occipital; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal; (11) posterior subocular broadly separated from the lower primary temporal by the antepenultimate supralabial, the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) preauricular scales small, nonimbricate and in three rows; (13) postmental single; (14) posteriormost infralabial elongate; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 31 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14 dorsal longitudinal scale rows arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 12 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adult dorsal ground coloration unknown, but with dorsal crossbands; and (20) juvenile color pattern unknown. This species differs from all other species of Abronia having spinelike supra-auricular scales, except for A. smithi, A. ochoterenai, and A. fimbriata (variably), in having 12 longitudinal ventral scale rows, with the lateral rows expanded compared with adjacent ventral rows. Abronia leurolepis differs from all members of the Abronia aurita group except A. fimbriata and A. lythrochila (variably) in lacking a frontonasal scale. Abronia leurolepis differs from A. fimbriata in lacking expanded supranasals that meet at the dorsal midline, in having more dorsal transverse scale rows (31 versus 27-30), and in being a stockier animal. Abronia leurolepis differs from A. lythrochila in lacking a frontonasal (usually present in A. lythrochila), in having a single a scale row between the occipital and first nuchal scale row, in having 12 versus 14 ventral longitudinal scale rows, and in having more (31 versus 28-30) dorsal transverse scale rows. Abronia leurolepis differs from A. ochoterenai in having a single (rather than two) postoccipital row between the occipital and first transverse nuchal scale row and in having no contact between the subocular and lower primary temporal (broad contact in A. ochoterenai). Abronia leurolepis differs from all members of the A. aurita group in having almost flat dorsal scales, with only slight traces of keeling on 3-4 scale rows on either side of the midline. The lateral longitudinal row of ventral scales are expanded in this species as they are in all members of the A. aurita group having 12 ventral longitudinal scale rows. However, the posterior (free) edges of the expanded scales in A. leurolepis are obtusely pointed, whereas in other species of the A. aurita group having 12 ventral longitudinal rows the posterior edges of these scales are rounded to truncate. The occipital scale is large in A. leurolepis as are the scales immediately behind it; thus, only a single scale lies between the occipital and first transverse nuchal scale row, a character shared in the A. aurita group only with A. gaiophantasma.” (Campbell & Frost 1993: 35)
Abronia matudai	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) supra-auricular scales of adults and subadults protuberant, but not spinelike; (2) supranasals large and often expanded, extending partially across the top of the snout, but not contacting each other at the dorsal midline; (3) a relatively large frontonasal scale, not contacting frontal; (4) posterior internasals relatively small, nearly the same size as the anterior internasals (except on one side of the holotype); (5) discrete canthals; (6) usually two anterior temporals per side, occasionally three or four; (7) parietal contacting median supraoculars; (8) a single occipital scale; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, longer than other scales in series; (11) the posterior subocular separated from the lower primary temporal by the antepenultimate or occasionally the penultimate supralabial, the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) two rows of subimbricate to granular preauricular scales; (13) postmental single or divided; (14) posteriormost infralabial not elongate; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 33-37 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14-16 dorsal longitudinal scale rows, arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 12-14 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adult males green, females brown; (20) juvenile pattern unknown. This species differs from all species of Abronia east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, except A. ornelasi, A. bogerti, A. montecristoi, and A. salvadorensis, in lacking distinctive spinelike supra-auriculars, although adults have relatively short but protuberant supraauricular scales. Abronia matudai differs from all Nuclear Central American species, except A. fimbriata, A. bogerti, and some individuals of A. aurita, in having the parietal contact the median supraoculars. Abronia matudai differs from A. ornelasi in having supranasals that do not contact each other at the dorsal midline and in having a frontonasal that does not contact the frontal; from A. montecristoi and A. salvadorensis in having more (33-37 versus 28 and 31-32 respectively) dorsal transverse scale rows; from A. fimbriata in having supranasals that do not meet at the dorsal midline and in having a frontonasal; from A. bogerti in usually having a minimum of six (versus eight) nuchals across the nape and 33-37 (versus 40) dorsal transverse scale rows; and from A. aurita in having more dorsal transverse scale rows (33-37 versus 27-31) and in lacking distinctive spinelike supraauricular scales.” (Campbell & Frost 1993: 38)Variation: Campbell & Frost 1993: 38
Abronia meledona	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: A species of Abronia in which (1) the distinctive supra-auricular scales of adults are protuberanat and spinelike; (2)supranasals are small and unexpanded, not in contact at dorsal midline; (3) median frontonasal scale present,usually not contacting frontal; (4) posterior internasals not greatly enlarged; (5) canthals discrete; (6) 2-3 anterior temporals per side; if two, both contacting the postoculars; if three, lower two contacting postoculars and upperscale relatively small and variably in contact with parietal; (7) parietal usually contacting median supraoculars, but in individuals having three anterior temporals per side, the upper temporal scale intervenes to partially or completely separate the parietal from the median supraocular series; (8) occipital single; (9) posterior head scales of adults not strongly convex or knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, similar in length to other scales in series; (11) posterior subocular broadly separated from the lower primary temporal by the penultimate supralabial, the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) granular preauricular scales in about three rows; (13) postmental single; (14) posterior infralabial elongate, usually about twice as long as preceding infralabials; (15) longitudinal nuchal scales in six rows; (16) dorsal scales in 27-32 transverse rows; (17) dorsal scales in 14 (rarely 12) longitudinal scale rows, arranged parallel relative to ventrolateral fold; (18) ventral scales in 14 longitudinal rows; (19) dorsum of adults green or cream-colored with heavy black mottling (Fig. 1); (20) subadults bronze with black spots arranged in irregular transverse series across dorsum.The characters in the standard diagnosis given above will serve to distinguish this species from most other species of Abronia, exclusive of some members of the aurita subgroup. Members of this subgroup are similar to each other morphologically, but can be distinguished by their unique color patterns and by a combination of morphological features (Table 1). In contrast to the pinkish cream or green dorsal coloration that is very heavily mottled with black in A. meledona, the dorsum is paler green with less black mottling in A. aurita and A. vasconcelosii, deep emerald green with the posterior edges of the scales yellow-green in A. anzuetoi, and some shade of brown with moderate dark mottling in A. campbelli. Adult males of A. aurita and A. vasconcelosii usually have distinctive orange spots on their heads, whereas these spots are absent or poorly developed in A. meledona; if present, they are restricted to about the posterior third of individual scales in the temporal region. Orange spots are absent in A. anzuetoi and A. campbelli. The circumorbital region and supra-auricular spines are bright yellow in all species except A. campbelli, in which these areas are whitish or pale tan. Abronia vasconcelosii most frequently has 11 supralabials, whereas the other species have a modal number of 10. Some characters appear to vary somewhat clinically from east to west (exclusive of A. aurita, which occurs well to the north of the southern highlands where the other species occur). The lower tertiary temporal scale makes broad contact with the second primary temporal (thus, the lower scales of the primary and tertiary series of temporals are also in contact) with a frequency of 76% in A. campbelli, 37% in A. meledona, 50% in A. anzuetoi, 3% in A. vasconcelosii and 0% in A. aurita. The modal number of transverse dorsal and ventral scale rows, respectively, are 31 and 34 in A. campbelli, 28 and 35 for A. meledona, 28 and 36 for A. anzuetoi, and 29 and 36 for A. aurita and A. vasconcelosii.
Abronia ochoterenai	Sauria	Anguidae	Description: Postmental unpaired; a group of long, slender, supra-auricular scales; scales of the sides of the neck relatively small; dorsal osteoderms developed over the entire body; two primary temporals in contact with the orbit; penultimate supralabial in contact with the orbit or not; anterior canthals usually present; three primary and three secondary temporals; three temporal elements in contact with the supralabials; 30 to 33 transverse rows of dorsals; a minimum of six scales in any nuchal row; caudal whorls 92-97; supranasals usually present; parietal separated from, or only narrowly in contact with, the medial supraoculars; dorsum nearly uniform,sometimeswithmoderatelydistincttransversedarkbands,those of the neck combined into a single large dark marking; frontonasal present or absent (Tihen 1954: 24).
Abronia ornelasi	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: The species with which A. ornelasi may be most easily confused is A. reidi (character states in parentheses) from the Sierra de las Tuxtlas in southern Veracruz, but it differs from the latter species by having a frontonasal that contacts the frontal (prefrontals in contact medially), four anterior temporals (rather than three), a parietal that does not contact the median supraoculars (upper primary temporal not in contact with frontoparietal), and fewer transverse rows of dorsal scales (30-33 versus 34-36). The salient features that distinguish species of Abronia inhabiting the southeastern Oaxacan highlands and the Sierra de los Tuxtlas are presented in Table 1 (Campbell 1984).
Abronia smithi	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) distinctive spinelike supra-auricular scales in subadults and adults; (2) unexpanded supranasals; (3) a median frontonasal scale, not contacting frontal; (4) posterior internasals not greatly enlarged; (5) discrete canthals; (6) usually four primary temporals, usually the lower two (rarely three) contacting the postoculars; (7) no parietalmedian supraocular contact; (8) a single occipital; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal or not; (11) the posterior subocular broadly separated from the lower primary temporal by the penultimate or antepenultimate supralabial, the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) preauricular scales relatively small, usually disposed in two rows, usually imbricate or subimbricate; (13) postmental divided or single; (14) posterior infralabial not elongate; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 27-30 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14 dorsal longitudinal scale rows arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 12 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adult dorsal coloration greenish (fig. 11E); (20) juvenile pattern with a broad pale brown middorsal stripe. This species differs from all other species of Abronia having spinelike supra-auricular scales, except for A. ochoterenai, A. matudai (variably), A. leurolepis, and A. fimbriata, in having 12 longitudinal ventral scale rows, and having the lateralmost rows wider than adjacent ventral rows. Abronia smithi differs from A. fimbriata and A. leurolepis in having a frontonasal scale, from A. leurolepis in having imbricate or subimbricate preauricular scales rather than multiple rows of protuberant scales, relatively short posteriormost infralabial, and definite keels on the body scales; from A. fimbriata in having unexpanded supranasals and discrete canthals; and from A. matudai in having four primary temporals (usually two, rarely three or four in A. matudai), no parietalmedian supraocular contact, and in lacking expanded supranasals. Abronia smithi appears to be most similar morphologically to A. ochoterenai, but differs from that species in having usually four or five, rather than three, primary temporals, usually having a fourth temporal scale row in evidence (clearly absent in A. ochoterenai), having the subocular separated from the lower primary temporal (broadly in contact in A. ochoterenai), usually having a divided rather than single postmental, having two or fewer rows of imbricate to subimbricate preauriculars rather than three rows of nonimbricate preauriculars, and in that adult females are yellow-green with darker spotting, rather than with dark transverse bands, and in having the circumorbital region bright yellow in A. smithi, not the ambient head color as in A. ochoterenai.” Campbell & Frost 1993: 30.Variation: Campbell & Frost 1993: 34.
Abronia taeniata	Sauria	Anguidae	Description: Postmental paired; no protuberant supra-auricular scales; dorsal osteoderms developed anteriorly at least as far back as the level of the fore limbs; sides of the neck with scales of moderate size; two primary temporals in contact with the orbit; the antepenultimate is the posteriormost supralabial to reach the orbit; anterior canthals present or absent; four primary and three secondary temporals; four temporal elements in contact with the supralabials, at least in some specimens; 29 to 36 transverse rows of dorsals; minimum number of scales in any nuchal row six; caudal whorls about 80; supranasals present, unexpanded; parietal separated from the medial supraoculars; dorsal ground color greenish, with conspicuous light areas laterally, giving the impression of seven or eight irregular dark cross bars (Tihen 1954: 19).
Hydrophis peronii	Serpentes	Elapidae	DESCRIPTION. Head short, small, diameter of neck one third to two-thirds that of the greatest diameter of body; rostril distinctly broader than deep; supraocular with raised, pointed posterior border; 19–23 scale rows on neck, 23–29 around body, with short keels, stronger and spinose in males; ventrals 142–206, as broad as or slightly narrower than adjacent body scales; greyish or pale brown above, whitish below, with or without dark dorsal bars tapering to points on sides; narrow ventral bands or spots may be present (from Leviton et al. 2014: 509).Diagnostic characters: The only sea snake with spines on the head: parietal and frontal scales broken up, supra- and postoculars and adjacent scales with spines posteriorly. Scale rows around neck 18–24, rarely up to 27; scale rows around body 23–31, rarely 21 or 32; ventrals 142–222. Maxillary teeth behind fangs 5–8.Colouration: Body cream, grey or pale brown above, paler below, with brown/black bands, which are brighter ventrally. Sometimes has dark small bars or spots between the bands, tapering to a point on the sides.See also description in Smith 1974.Characters (Acalyptophis): McDowell 1972: 232
Acanthocercus annectans	Sauria	Agamidae	Diagnosis: Klausewitz 1954: 145Description: Klausewitz 1954: 145, Tornier 1905: 371Coloration: Klausewitz 1954: 145, Tornier 1905: 371 (who compares annectens, flavicauda, and philipsii).
Acanthocercus cyanogaster	Sauria	Agamidae	Diagnosis: Klausewitz 1954: 141, 142Description: Klausewitz 1954: 142Coloration: Klausewitz 1954: 143
Acanthocercus phillipsii	Sauria	Agamidae	Diagnosis: Klausewitz 1954: 146 Description: Klausewitz 1954: 146 Coloration: Klausewitz 1954: 146Original description: “Head depressed snout as long as the diameter of the orbit; nostril lateral, slightly tubular, on the canthus rostralis. Upper head-scales smooth or obtusely keeled; occipital not enlarged; groups of small spinose scales near the ear latter entirely exposed, much larger than the eye-opening. Throat much plicate no gular pouch. Body much depressed, with a fold on each side of the back; scales on vertebral region enlarged, polygonal, smooth, minute and granular on the sides of the back, larger and keeled on the flanks ; ventral scales small, smooth. Scales on limbs large and imbricate, strongly keeled, nearly as large as caudals. Fourth finger slightly longer than third; fourth toe a little longer than third, fifth extending beyond first. Tail scarcely compressed, covered with strongly keeled mucronate scales, forming rather irregular annuli. Male with two rows of large præanal “pores." Back blackish, with small greenish-white spots and a broad greenish-white vertebral stripe; head, limbs, and tail olive above; throat with a wide-meshed blackish network; belly and lower surface of limbs bluish grey; praeanal pores orange lower surface of tail yellowish.” (Boulenger 1895: 166)
Acanthocercus yemensis	Sauria	Agamidae	Diagnosis: Klausewitz 1954: 143Description: Klausewitz 1954: 143Coloration: Klausewitz 1954: 144
Xenagama zonura	Sauria	Agamidae	Diagnosis: A large Xenagama lizard (SVL of males up to 84.5 mm) with a triangular depressed head and the nasal scale keeled and on the canthus rostralis. Ear hole surrounded by single short conical scales, while tufts of elongated scales are lacking. Tympanum superficial. No neck crest present. Body scalation heterogeneous, with small matrix spinose scales and intermixed with keeled and spinose enlarged scales. Vertebral scales smooth to feebly keeled and larger than those on the flanks. Gular and ventral scales smooth. Tail slightly longer than the body and head, discoidal part not developed, but base of the tail distinctly broad. Tail base arranged in whorls with one scale ring each [from WAGNER et al. 2013].
Acanthodactylus arabicus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small, slender body with pointed snout. Four large supraoculars. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular separated from the lip and lodged among the 4th, 5th, and 6th supralabial. Two supratemporals. Strongly keeled temporals. Scant pectination of ear opening. Intensely imbricate gulars.Dorsals strongly keeled and double the size of laterals, numbering 27 to 37 across the middle of the body. Ventrals arranged in 14 longitudinal rows with the outermost ones oblique and keeled. Four series of scales on the fingers. Strongly pectinate toes. Color pattern consisting of light and dark longitudinal bands  (Salvador 1982: 143).
Acanthodactylus aureus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Medium-sized, slender body. Sharply pointed snout. Four supralabials anterior to the subocular. Four entire supraoculars. Temporals keeled. Low number of dorsals. 14 oblique longitudinal rows of ventrals. Four series of scales on fingers. Row of granules between the supraoculars and superciliaries usually absent, at times one. Third pair of submaxillaries separated or only partially in contact. Reticulate color pattern  (Salvador 1982: 122).Acanthodactylus aureus can be distinguished from all other members of the scutellatus group except A. taghitensis by a peculiar head scalation: in this species two supralabials only are in contact with the subocular, as a result of the fusion of the third and fourth (rarely the fourth and fifth) supralabials. This character was absent in only one of the A. aureus in our sample (n = 77), and was present in only one A. scutellatus and one A. dumerili (out of 746 specimens that do not belong to A. aureus or A. taghitensis). In addition, we found other diagnostic characters in colour pattern and habitus (see systematic account below). Acanthodactylus aureus, based on our sample, is thus a clearly diagnosable and easy to identify taxon (Crochet et al. 2003).
Acanthodactylus bedriagai	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Large, robust body. Relatively short snout. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Subocular separated from the lip by a small scale. Blunt temporals. Flat, unkeeled dorsals. Slight pectination of the fourth toe. Smooth, imbricate scales on the upperside of the tail. Small ventrals arranged in 14 longitudinal series. Three series of scales on fingers. Both male and female having 26 presacral vertebrae. Four lines of ocelli along the back with only slightly reticulate traces of pattern between them. Blue coloration (Salvador 1982: 85).
Acanthodactylus beershebensis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: An Acanthodactylus with three series of scales around the fingers and toes, which are not pectinate; usually four (otherwise three) complete supraoculars; subocular bordering the mouth or not; dorsal scales small, 50-70 across midbody; ventral plates in 10-14, mode 12, straight longitudinal series; lateral clavula of hemipenis has two branches, lateral branch at least 130% the length of median branch; 24-26 presacral vertebrae in males, 24-27 in females. (Moravec et al. 1999)Description of the holotype: Male; moderately robust, neck as wide as shoulders, barely narrower than head; tail base swollen for a stretch equalling head length, wider than inter-femoral distance. Measurements: ra, 67 mm; head length, 16.2 mm (24.2 percra); head width, 11.8 mm (17.6 percra); head depth, 9.0 mm (13.4 percra); head index, 137.3; forelimb length, 22 mm (32.8 percra); hindlimb length, 36 mm (53.7 percra); fourth toe length, 16.9 mm (25.2 percra); tail length (complete), 97 mm (144 percra). Pholidosis: key head shields symmetrical: first, second and third supraoculars entire, the fourth fragmented; supralabials anterior to the centre of eye, 4; subocular narrowly excluded from lip by fourth and fifth supralabials; gulars, 32; plates in collar, 12. Dorsals across midbody, 65; ventrals across belly, 12; transverse rows of ventrals, 35; scales separating the two series of femoral pores, 1; preanals in straight median series, 8; subdigital lamellae, R, 21 & L, 20; femoral pores, R, 23 & L, 22. Colouration (in alcohol): head grey, speckled darker, laterally with distinct vertical white-framed blackish bar through the eye. Dorsal ground colour grey. Four pairs of longitudinal series of white specks, about ten specks from shoulder to pelvis, each covering approx. 10 granules; the two central pairs of speck-series conspicuous, the third series barely indicated, the fourth moderate. Specks are partly framed in black, this frame merging between successive specks; these longitudinal black designs are transversely connected, in black, sometimes at the level of white specks, sometimes between them. In this black-and white reticulum the remnants of the ground colour appear as grey, semi-ordered, oval spots. Limbs dotted whitish; tail base with a few black-and-white ocelli. Ventral parts (including tail to tip) unmarked whitish. (Moravec et al. 1999)Variation: The variation of mensural and meristic (pholidotic and osteological) characters is shown in Tables 1-3 and 5-6; the extent of sexual dimorphism of these characters is shown in Tab. 7: and variation in two qualitative pholidotic characters is shown in Tab. 8. In the hemipenis, the long branch of the lateral clavula is 130% the length of the shorter branch in 6 males, but 150% in the 7th and 200% in the 8th (HUJ-R 17162). In the colouration, the stable component are the dorsal series of white spots, usually four on each side, but may be reduced to three or two. Laterally (ventro-lateral) of these may be one or two additional series of larger and dimmer light spots. The connecting, or framing, black markings may be arranged mainly longitudinally, mainly transversely, or as reticulation. The pattern is more contrasting in males than in females, alive or preserved (WERNER 1995: 57 and fig. 6; fig. 6). Only exceptionally are the white spots missing, with the black markings on a uniform grey back (e.g., female HUJ-R 6931). Juveniles (31-32 mm ra) are striped in high contrast: on each side four whitish lines (complete or broken), on brown-blackish background. The mid-dorsal dark space is partly split by a median white line of very variable extent. In the living adult male from Negev Junction (6.1.1997, H. SELIGMANN and B. SHACHAM), the ground colour was pinkish brown (Ostwald 3gc). (Moravec et al. 1999)
Acanthodactylus blanci	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Large species, much larger than either erythrurus or savignyi. Head not as slender or pointed as in savignyi but neither as robust as in erythrurus. Smaller lanceolate concavity than in either of the other two species. Undivided frontonasal. Absence of scales between the prefrontals. Only one row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. No auricular denticulation. No distinguishable gular fold. Fourth toe as equally pectinate as in ery'thrums but less so than in savignyi.Sharply keeled dorsals. Blue tail in young as in savignyi. Eyelids without pectination. Three series of scales on fingers. Subocular not in contact with the upper lip (Salvador 1982: 70).
Acanthodactylus blanfordii	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Four supraoculars. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular separated from the lip. Temporals sharply keeled. Ear opening with only scant anterior pectination. Dorsals small and intensely imbricate. 12 or 14 oblique longitudinal rows of ventrals. Fingers with four series ofscales. Toes strongly pectinate. Scales on the upperside of the tail large and sharply keeled  (Salvador 1982: 151).
Acanthodactylus boskianus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis (genus): Occipital absent. Fingers with three or four series of scales. Flat ventrals. Collar present. Toes with more or less developed pectination. Femoral pores present. Parietal foramen present [SALVADOR 1982: 8].Phylogenetics: A. schreiberi nested within A. b. asper, and the subspecies A. schreiberi syriacus nested within a distinct lineage of A. b. asper (Tamar et al. 2014). Also, A. b. khattensis and A. b. nigeriensis are nested within A.b. asper (K. Tamar, pers. comm., 23 Oct 2014). Psonis et al. 2016) found that the boskianus species group is monophyletic with at least four distinct subclades within A. boskianus, thus indicating that this taxon should be considered as a species complex.Description: The vertebral dark stripe is simple in A. opheodurus but forked in A. boskianus. The vertebral stripe is forked but light-colored in two geographically adjacent related taxa, A. b. boskianus (Daudin, 1802) of northern Egypt and A. schreiberi syriacus Boettger, 1878 of coastal Israel.Diagnosis (boskianus): Medium to large size species. Usually four entire supraoculars but, at times, the first one divided. Pectinate anterior border of ear opening. Keeled temporals. Slightly denticulated eyelids. Conspicuous gular fold. Three series of scales on fingers. Ventrals arranged in 10 straight longitudinal rows. Very large, keeled, imbricate dorsals. Granular scalation on sides of the body. Moderate to intense pectination of fourth toe. Large, imbricate, and sharply keeled scales on the upper surface of the tail. (Salvador 1982: 23)Diagnosis (nigeriensis): “Lacertidé associé aux régions de savane soudano-sahélienne du sud du Niger et du nord du Nigeria, génétiquement distinct des populations du complexe Acanthodactylus boskianus de Mauritanie, d’Afrique du Nord et d’Égypte dont il partage les principales caractéristiques morphologiques (trois rangées d’écailles aux doigts, quatre supraoculaires, écailles des flancs beaucoup plus petites que les écailles médio-dorsales qui sont larges et fortement carénées, quatrième et cinquième supralabiales en contact avec la sous-oculaire), mais caractérisé par sa petite taille (longueur museau-cloaque des adultes comprise entre 50 et 63 mm) et une coloration différente des juvéniles et des femelles qui ne présentent pas de couleurs vives sur la queue” [TRAPÉ et al. 2012].Diagnosis (khattensis): “lacertidé de l’ouest de la Mauritanie, présentant les principales caractéristiques des espèces et sous-espèces du complexe Acanthodactylus boskianus (trois rangées d’écailles aux doigts, quatre supraoculaires, écailles des flancs beaucoup plus petites que les écailles médio-dorsales, quatrième et cinquième supralabiales en contact avec la sous-oculaire), mais génétiquement distinct des populations de ce complexe d’Égypte, d’Asie, d’Afrique du Nord et des autres régions d’Afrique occidentale. Il est caractérisé par sa grande taille (longueur museau-cloaque des adultes comprise entre 70 et 82 mm), son petit nombre de rangées de dorsales (28-32), la présence de 10 rangées de ventrales et sa coloration particulière.” [TRAPÉ et al. 2012].
Acanthodactylus boueti	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small species belonging to the erythrurus group. Three rows of scales on fingers. Only third supraocular preserved while other three reduced to mere granules. Small, keeled dorsal scales. Very fragmented parietals. Conspicuous lanceolate concavity. Two scales between prefrontals as in savignyi. Unpectinate eyelids. Ear opening lacking anterior denticulation.The upper and lower lips come together evenly. Two rows of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Distinguishable gular fold. Ventrals arranged in straight longitudinal and transverse rows, the longitudinal ones numbering eight. Small and slightly keeled scales on the upper surface of the tail. Low number of femoral pores. Almost inexistent pectination of fourth toe. Nasal scale not denticulate. Short toes (Salvador 1982: 74).
Acanthodactylus busacki	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: A species of the pardalis species-group (i.e., small flat or carinated dorsal scales; three series of scales on the fingers; three supraoculars; 12 and sometimes 14 straight longitudinal row of ventrals; slightly pectinate toes; body pattern combining longitudinal rows of light ocelli and black reticulation) characterized by the combination of the following characters: (1) maximum recorded SVL 73 mm (51–73 mm in adult males); (2) three supraoculars, the first supraocular is either entire or fragmented with usually one row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries; (3) 13–27 granules around the supraoculars; (4) subocular with a distinct keel located between the fourth and fifth upper labials and not contacting the lip; (5) upper temporals small and pointed whereas the lower temporals are large and smooth; (6) 8–11 collar scales; (7) 12 longitudinal rows of ventral scales; (8) 29–34 transverse rows of ventral scales; (9) 20–26 femoral pores on each side; (10) three rows of scales on fingers with slight lateral pectination, with 16–23 lamellae underneath the fourth toe; (11) dorsal scales are pointed and smooth; (12) dorsal colour pattern of juveniles, females and sub-adult males consists of two lateral longitudinal lines of pale ocelli on each side with strong black reticulation among them (four longitudinal dorsal lines in total), adult males have intricate colouration of black reticulation that covers most of the dorsal area and the rows of pale ocelli become indistinct or may completely disappear; (13) the males exhibit a unique colouration: the neck, the posterior part of the throat, the anterior parts of the body and belly, and the forelimbs are more or less reddish; this tint becoming progressively yellowish, whitish or slightly bluish at the posterior parts and tail; (14) sub-adults have reddish or white ventral tail colour.
Acanthodactylus cantoris	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Large species. Pointed snout. Four supraoculars. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular not incontact with the upper lip. Temporals keeled. Anterior pectination ofear opening present. Dorsals granular, keeled, and imbricate. Four rows of scales on fingers. Strongly pectinate toes. Scales on the upperside of the tail large and sharply keeled  (Salvador 1982: 155).
Acanthodactylus dumerilii	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small species with short, blunt snout. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular not in contact with the upper lip. Ventrals arranged in 12 or 14 longitudinal rows. Fourth supraocular divided. Dorsals flat, large and sharply keeled. One or two rows of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Color pattern very faint or completely absent (Salvador 1982: 126).Diagnosis (exiguus): 14 oblique longitudinal rows of ventrals. Relatively shorter hindlegs. Fourth supraocular generally entire. One row of granules between the superciliaries and the supraoculars. Slightly reticulate color pattern in males. Females with pale band on each side of the body (Salvador 1982: 130).Diagnosis (senegalensis). Small size (snout-vent length of adults between 49 and 60 mm, mean: 51.6; Table 2). The subocular in contact with three or (rarely) four supralabials in 100% of the individuals (Table3) distinguishes Acanthodactylus senegalensis from A. aureus and A. taghitensis. Acanthodactylus senegalensis has the lowest scale counts within the group. Low number of large dorsal scales (range: 34–53, mean: 41.3), about twice as large as the flank scales, flat and strongly carinate (code 6 in 89% of the individuals, the remaining ones having code 4 or 5; Table 3, see Fig. 16). Fewer than two rows of supraciliary granules in 59% of our sample, two rows or more in 41% of the specimens (Table 3). Generally 10, 11 or 12 longitudinal rows of ventral scales (in 89% of the specimens, range: 10–14, mean: 12; Table 2). Low number of femoral pores (generally fewer than 18 on each side, range: 11–20.5, mean: 15.6). Always three colours on the dorsum. In males, black dots over a dappled pattern of whitish spots on a beige or russet ground colour, flanks darker than the dorsum. Females have a lineated pattern with a dark vertebral line. Black spots of the males sometimes aligned over the dorsum, resulting in a pattern similar the females pattern. Pileus sandy-coloured with darker, weakly delimited spots. When present, this typical pattern (dark flanks of males, dark vertebral line of females) distinguishes A. senegalensis from A. scutellatus, A. dumerili and A. longipes (see Fig. 12a). A further difference from these three species is the obvious size difference between the scales of the flanks and the scales of the dorsum. Number of dorsal scales diagnostic in comparison with A. longipes (34–53 dorsal rows in A. senegalensis [n = 187] against 55–77 dorsal rows in A. longipes [n = 65]). Dorsal number also useful in comparison with A. scutellatus: 47 or fewer rows of dorsals in 95% of A. senegalensis specimens, 48 or more in 92% of A. scutellatus specimens. Further separated from A. scutellatus and A. longipes by the lower number of ventrals (13 or more in 96% of the A. scutellatus and in 100% of the A. longipes, compare also minima and maxima for A. senegalensis and A. longipes in Table 2). Dorsal scales also more strongly carinate than in either A. scutellatus or A. longipes: no specimens of these species reach code 6 for CARE (compare with A. senegalensis above). For comparisons with A. dumerili, especially in the area of sympatry, see that species (Crochet et al. 2003).
Acanthodactylus erythrurus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis (erythrurus): Smooth dorsal scales (or weakly keeled on rear of back), rounded snout, barely concave frontal, entire internasal, usually no interprefrontal granules (exceptionally one), 1st supraocular generally fragmented into fewer than six scales on both sides (sometimes into six scales on both sides), subocular usually in contact with lip (sometimes it is separated from the lip by the 4th and 5th labials that are joined in this case) (from BONS & GENIEZ 1995).Diagnosis (atlanticus): Smooth dorsal scales (or weakly keeled on rear of back), rounded snout, barely concave frontal, internasal nearly always whole (exceptionally divided), no interprefrontal granules (sometimes one, exceptionally two), 1st supraocular generally fragmented into fewer than six scales on both sides (exceptionally six on one or both sides), subocular generally separated from the lip by a small rectangular or oval scale (exceptionally this small scale is absent and the subocular may or may not be in contact with the lip) (from BONS & GENIEZ 1995).Diagnosis (belli): Smooth dorsal scales (or weakly keeled on rear of back), rounded snout, barely concave frontal, entire internasal, usually no interprefrontal granules (exceptionally one), 1st supraocular generally fragmented into fewer than six scales on both sides (exceptionally six on one or both sides), subocular in contact with lip (from BONS & GENIEZ 1995).Diagnosis (lineomaculatus): Strongly keeled dorsal scales, slim pointed snout, concave frontal (with sharply angled lateral edges), internasal usually divided, except north of Rabat, usually one or two granules, except north of Rabat where they are generally absent, 1st supraocular usually fragmented into more than six scales or granules, subocular usually separated from the lip by the 4th and 5th supralabials, the 4th being usually fragmented at the rear by a small trapezoidal scale in localities north of Rabat (from BONS & GENIEZ 1995).
Acanthodactylus felicis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Medium-small species. Short snout. Toes relatively very long. Four supraoculars. One row ofgranules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Small granular temporals without keels. Large ear opening slightly denticulated anteriorly by two or three scales. Moderately pectinate border ofeyelid and large scales covering lower lid. Subocular separated from the lip and wedged between the fourth and fifth supralabial. Ventrals arranged in 8 straight longitudinal rows. Dorsal scales larger than laterals, numbering from 36 to 42. Scant pectination oftoes. Three series of scales on fingers (Salvador 1982: 50; see also Arnold 1980: 300).
Acanthodactylus gongrorhynchatus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Slender body with pointed snout swollen at the nasal region. Four supraoculars, the fourth at times divided. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Four supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular not in contact with the lip and lodged between the fourth and fifth supralabial. Three supratemporals. Ear opening almost closed off by two or three scales on the anterior portion. Very small dorsals numbering from 58 to76 across the midbody. Fingers with four series of scales. Very intense pectination of toes. Scales on the upperside of the tail medium-sized and only slightly keeled. Ventrals usually arranged in 12 straight longitudinal rows  (Salvador 1982: 136).Original diagnosis: Leviton & Anderson 1967: 171Description of holotype: Leviton & Anderson 1967: 171
Acanthodactylus grandis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Four supraoculars. One row of granules between the superciliaries and the supraoculars. Four supralabials anterior to the subocular. Temporals granular and not keeled. Unpectinate eyelids. Anterior border of ear opening only lightly pectinate. Small dorsal scales. 14 or 16 oblique longitudinal rows of ventrals. Four series of scales on fingers. Lateral pectination scant or completely absent on toes  (Salvador 1982: 110).
Acanthodactylus guineensis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small species. Elongated depressed body. Very sharply pointed head. Relatively short hindlegs. Ill-defined lanceolate concavity. Prefrontals in contact. Two large supraoculars corresponding to the second and third with the fourth divided into two or three scales. Nostril situated among three scales. Two rows of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Four supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular in contact with the upper lip. Small, weakly keeled dorsals. Ten straight transverse rows of ventrals. Toes tricarinate ventrally with scant lateral pectination (Salvador 1982: 77).
Acanthodactylus haasi	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Moderately pointed snout not swollen at the nasal region. Two supraoculars corresponding to the second and the third. First and fourth divided. One or two rows ofgranules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular not in contact with the lip and wedged among the fourth, fifth, and sixth supralabial. Moderately conspicuous subocular keel. Two supratemporals, the anterior one larger. Granular temporals, the upper ones keeled while the lower ones larger and smooth. Moderately visible ear opening, pectinate anteriorly by two or three scales. Intensely imbricate gulars. Small, weakly keeled dorsals numbering 44 across the midbody. Ventrals arranged in 12 straight longitudinal rows. Fingers with four series of scales. Strong pectination of the toes with seven keels on each subdigital lamella  (Salvador 1982: 140).Original diagnosis: Leviton & Anderson 1967: 177Description of holotype: Leviton & Anderson 1967: 177
Acanthodactylus longipes	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Medium-sized species with relatively long hindlegs. Strongly pectinate eyelids. Small dorsals in high number. 16 oblique longitudinal rows of ventrals. Intense pectination of toes. Lightly reticulate pattern on sides of body, absent on back (Salvador 1982: 101).
Acanthodactylus maculatus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small, slender body. Relatively long and pointed snout. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Subocular not in contact with the lip. Three rows ofscales on the fingers. Small granular temporal scales. Small tympanic scale present. Ear opening lightly pectinate anteriorly. Somewhat keeled dorsals. Ventrals arranged in 12 straight longitudinal series. Fourth toe moderately pectinate. Medium-sized, keeled scales on the upper surface of the tail. Males with 24 presacral vertebrae, females with 25. Considerably diminished color pattern usually with traces of the two dark dorsal bands and the lines of ocelli (Salvador 1982: 93).
Acanthodactylus masirae	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small and slender species with relatively long hindlegs. Head rounded posteriorly with narrow pointed snout. Lanceolate concavity slightly conspicuous. Four large supraoculars. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Smooth and granular temporal scales. Large ear opening slightly pectinate anteriorly. Pectinate eyelids with large scales covering lower lids. Four supralabials lying anterior to the subocular. Subocular bordering the orbit. Four series of scales on fingers. 10 straight longitudinal rows of ventrals. Flat, keeled dorsal scales larger than laterals and numbering from 29 to 33 across the midbody. Minimal pectination of toes with only a single keel on the subdigital lamellae (Salvador 1982: 42).
Acanthodactylus micropholis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Two entire supraoculars. One or two rows of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Pectinate eyelids. Four supralabials anterior to the subocular. Minute unkeeled temporals. Large ear opening with no anterior pectination. Flat dorsal scales equal in size or slightly larger than laterals. Ventrals arranged in 10 straight longitudinal rows. Fingers present three rows of scales. Unpectinate toes (Salvador 1982: 19).
Acanthodactylus nilsoni	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Eight longitudinal and 26 transverse roes ofventral plates; 48-52 imbricate, keeled scales across dorsum; toes covered with three rows of scales; 9/7 supralabials, 4 anterior to subocular not bordering mouth; temporals keeled, more than 100; gular fold dlstmct; 27-27 gular scales; 10-12 scales in collar; 23-24 lamellae under fourth toe which is moderately denticulated laterally; eyelids with weak pectination (Rastegar-Pouyani, 1998: 258, cited in Anderson 1999: 258).Coloration: Upper surface of head olive brown; temporal region and upper surface of forelegs light brown; upper surface of hindlimbs with many large whitish spots bordered by dark brown circles; dorsum grayish brown, with 6-8 interrupted longitudinal dark stripes, dorsolateral ones having a tendency to form a reticulation; vertebral region without dark stripe; upper surface of tail light brownish gray; ventral surfaces whitish. (Rastegar-Pouyani 1998: 260, cited in Anderson 1999: 258).
Acanthodactylus opheodurus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Description: The vertebral dark stripe is simple in A. opheodurus but forked in A. boskianus. The vertebral stripe is forked but light-colored in two geographically adjacent related taxa, A. b. boskianus (Daudin, 1802) of northern Egypt and A. schreiberi syriacus Boettger, 1878 of coastal Israel.
Acanthodactylus orientalis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Habitus robust; 2 supraoculars; one row of granules between supraoculars and superciliaries; eyelids without pectination; large ear opening without anterior pectination; temporals granular and without keels; subocular in contact with upper lip; 4 supralabials anterior to subocular; dorsals flat, without keels, 42-50 across middle of back; ventrals in 10 straight longitudinal rows; 3 series of scales around fingers; toes pectinate; scales on upper side of tail flat, medium-sized, smooth and imbricate. (Salvador, 1982:101, 106 for A. t. iracensis.) (Leviton et la. 1992).
Acanthodactylus pardalis	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Medium or large robust body. Snout slightly pointed upwards. Three entire supraoculars and one, the fourth, divided into granules. One or two rows of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Three series of scales on fingers. Subocular not in contact with upper lip. Four supralabials anterior to the subocular. Unkeeled temporals. Anterior border of ear opening denticulate.Tympanic scale small or totally absent. Flat medium-sized dorsals. Ventrals arranged in 12 straight longitudinal rows. Slightly pectinate fourth toe with uni or tricarinate subdigital lamellae. Scales on the upper surface of the tail either small or medium-sized and flat or lightly keeled. Males with 24 or 25 presacral vertebrae, females with 25. Males with irregular reticulate color pattern, females with two stair-shaped dorsal bands (Salvador 1982: 80).
Acanthodactylus robustus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Very robust habitus; short, wide head; relatively short limbs and tail; 2 supraoculars (2nd and 3rd; 1st and 4th divided); one or 2 rows of granules between supraoculars and superciliaries; eyelid.s not pectinate; ear opening not pectinate, upper half covered by fold of skin; tem~oral scales granular; indistinct subocular keel; subocular separated from IIp by small scale; 4 supralabials anterior to subocular; gulars large, imbricate; ventrals in 12 straight longitudinal rows; dorsals smooth, flat, slightly larger than laterals; scales on upper surface of tail large, smooth, imbricate; 3 series of scales around fingers; toes slightly pectinate. (Salvador, 1982:107, Leviton et al. 1992)
Acanthodactylus savignyi	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small species. Head more slender and pointed than in A. erythrurus. Frontonasal concavity is more accentuated than in A. bland or A. erythrurus. Divided frontonasal. Two scales between the prefrontals. Supraocular region with extense granular area. Two rows of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Scarce auricular denticulation. Distinguishable gular fold. Fourth toe more pectinate than in erythrurus or bland. Sharply keeled dorsal scales. Color pattern consisting of dark narrow bands on each side of the back. Lightly pectinate eyelids. Three rows of scales on the fingers (Salvador 1982: 66).
Acanthodactylus schmidti	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Species of variable size. Pointed snout. First, second, and third supraoculars large; fourth usually divided into two. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Subocular not in contact with the upper lip and wedged among 4th, 5th, and 6th supralabial. Two keeled supratemporals. Temporals sharply keeled. Ear opening with distinct anterior pectination. Scales on the sides of the posterior dorsum double the size of those in the center of the dorsum and those on the sides of the body. 32 to 54 dorsals across the midbody. Ventrals arranged in 14 or 16 oblique longitudinal rows with the outer rows consisting of pointed scales. Fingers present four series of scales while toes are strongly pectinate. Reticulate color pattern in both young and adults  (Salvador 1982: 146).
Acanthodactylus schreiberi	Sauria	Lacertidae	Description: The vertebral dark stripe is simple in A. opheodurus but forked in A. boskianus. The vertebral stripe is forked but light-colored in two geographically adjacent related taxa, A. b. boskianus (Daudin, 1802) of northern Egypt and A. schreiberi syriacus Boettger, 1878 of coastal Israel.
Acanthodactylus scutellatus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Elongated pointed snout. Generally three supraoculars. One row of granules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Five supralabials anterior to the subocular. Small, keeled temporals. Tympanic scale absent. First three pairs of submaxillaries in contact. Dorsals small, flat, granular, and weakly keeled in relatively high number. 14 oblique longitudinal rows of ventrals. Fingers with four series of scales. Intense pectination on fourth toe. Reticulate color pattern.  (Salvador 1982: 114).
Acanthodactylus spinicauda	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Small species. Along with maculatus, body more slender than other species of pardalis group. Relatively long slender limbs with toes longer and more pectinate than in other species. Spiny sides of tail base. Pectinate eyelids. Distinct pectination of nasal scale. Anterior border of ear opening denticulate. Barely keeled, flat dorsals.Subocular not in contact with upper lip. Three series of scales on the fingers. Males with 24 presacral vertebrae, females with 26. Color pattern greatly diminished with near absence of dorsal stripes and bands. Conspicuous ocelli and reticulation on body sides (Salvador 1982: 99).
Acanthodactylus tilburyi	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: A relatively small and slender species with a fairly pointed snout; supraocular scales more or less intact; subocular separated from lip; 5 upper labial scales anterior to center of eye; ear opening not restricted dorsally; dorsal scales keeled and somewhat imbricate, 41-57 at midbody, 18-24 between hind limbs; ventral scales tessellated, 15-19 in longest row across belly; 4 series of scales around fIngers, subdigital lamellae with single well-developed keel and indications of others towards tips of fingers; digits strongly pectinate; dorsum dappled, dark dorsolateral stripe present, often with paler one above and below it; adults less contrastingly colored than juveniles; young and some females with red pigmented tail. (Arnold, 1986: 378, Leviton et al. 1992: 56)
Acanthodactylus tristrami	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Large, robust body. Two supraoculars. One row of granules between supraoculars and superciliaries. Eyelids without pectination. Large ear opening without anterior pectination. Temporals granular and without keels. Subocular in contact with the upper lip. Four supralabials anterior tothe subocular. Dorsals flat and without keels. 10 straight longitudinal rows of ventrals. Three rows of scales on fingers. Toes not pectinate. Scales on upperside of tail flat, medium-sized, unkeeled and subimbricate (Salvador 1982: 101).
Acanthodactylus yemenicus	Sauria	Lacertidae	Diagnosis: Short snout. Four entire supraoculars. One row ofgranules between the supraoculars and the superciliaries. Lightly keeled temporals. Large ear opening slightly denticulated anteriorly by 4 or 5 scales. Moderately pectinate eyelid. Medium-sized scales on the lower lid. Sharply keeled tympanic scale present. Subocular separated from the lip and lodged between the fourth and fifth supralabial. Distinguishable gular fold. Ventrals arranged in 10 straight longitudinal rows. Small flat dorsals lightly keeled and numbering 34 to 57 across the middle of the body. Toes with scant pectination. Three rows of scales on fingers. Large and distinctly keeled scales on the upper side of the tail (Salvador 1982: 54).
