Antaresia maculosa	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: The clade found in our analyses that we call maculosa b. It differs from Antaresia perthensis by having highly contrasted large dark blotches with usually ragged edges along the body (vs less contrasted blotches and dots), a larger body size (max. SVL 1220 mm vs 670 mm) and a higher number of ventrals (249–280 vs 213–247). It differs from A. childreni by having a blotched pattern (vs. being patternless) or by lacking a space between the blotches in the anterior third of the body creating a lateral pale stripe and by generally having more ragged edges on its blotches. There are no consistent morphological diagnostic characters to differentiate it from the subspecies in Cape York, but it can be differentiated from it by various nucleotide substitutions in the cyt-b gene (see Table S7). From the species in the Torres Strait and New Guinea it is differentiated by having larger and more contrasting blotches (vs smaller scattered dots), and by never having less than four prefrontal scales (vs. sometimes having two or three prefrontals) (Esquerré et al. 2021).Description. A small python, with a maximum recorded SVL of 1220 mm. Maximum recorded tail length is 112 mm and tail length is on average is 0.094 of the SVL. Head length is on average 0.036 of the SVL, and it is on average 1.68 times the head width. Maximum recorded mid-body girth is 140 mm, and it is on average 2.04 times thicker than the neck.Head scalation comprises large symmetrical shields. One large roughly hexagonal or pentagonal frontal scale, divided into two scales longitudinally in some specimens. Two parietal scales directly in contact with the frontal, posterior to which scales are largely undifferentiated. Parietals usually in contact but sometimes small scales are formed between them or between them and the frontal. One large supraocular above each eye. Four large prefrontal scales, with sometimes one additional small scale between them. Two internasal scales. Rostral scale in contact with internasals, nasal and first supralabials. There are 9–12 supralabials with an average of 10.5; and 11–14 infralabials with an average of 12.9. Three to four of the infralabials have conspicuous heat pits. There is a single large, anteriorly pointed preocular scale, with an additional much smaller one between it and the fourth and/or fifth supralabial scales. There are 1–11 irregularly sized loreal scales. Two to four postocular scales. Dorsal scales are smooth, rhomboidal and slightly overlapping. In some cases, these are more elongated anteriorly and becoming more compact towards the tail. Ventral scales are transversally elongated shields; ranging in number from 249 to 280, with an average of 259.6. Anal scale is single (undivided). Subcaudal scales range from 37 to 46 with an average of 41.2, most of them divided but sometimes fused towards the tip of the tail.Background colouration ranges between greyish brown, light sandy colour, and a more reddish ochre. The spots or blotches on top are much darker, ranging from chocolate brown to a reddish dark brown. Shape and distribution of the spots is very variable. They tend to have ragged edges and be irregular in shape. Spots sometimes fuse on the back, creating large continuous and irregular patches. Sometimes (e.g. specimens from Magnetic Island, Queensland), blotches are small and uniformly speckled along the body, and can be quite faint. There is a slightly iridescent sheen to the skin (Esquerré et al. 2021).Diagnosis (peninsularis). The clade found in our analyses that we call maculosa a. It differs from Antaresia perthensis by having highly contrasted large dark blotches with usually ragged edges along the body (vs less contrasted blotches and dots), a larger body size (max. SVL 1320 mm vs 670 mm) and a higher number of ventrals (252–287 vs 213–247). It differs from A. childreni by lacking a space between the blotches in the anterior third of the body creating a pale lateral stripe and by normally having more ragged edges on its blotches. There are no consistent morphological diagnostic characters to differentiate it from A. maculosa maculosa, but it can be differentiated from it by various nucleotide substitutions in the cyt-b gene (see Table S7). From the species in the Torres Strait and New Guinea it is differentiated by having larger and more contrasting blotches (vs smaller scattered dots), and by never having less than four prefrontal scales (vs sometimes having two or three prefrontals), and by never having less than three postocular scales (vs sometimes having two postoculars) (Esquerré et al. 2021).
Apodora papuana	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description. Kluge 1993 did not diagnose Apodora, but Barker et al. 2015 provide the following characterization: “Apodora papuana in life is starkly different from any of the other species in Liasis. Though there are general overall similarities between Apodora papuana and Liasis olivaceus (i.e. both are large brown elongated snakes with similarly high counts of ventral scales), perceivable similarities end there. We have extensive experience with living specimens of Apodora, and also with all taxa of Liasis (fuscus, dunni, mackloti, savuensis, olivaceus) excepting L. olivaceus barroni. We have observed that A. papuana has the remarkable ability to change the colour of its head, eyes, and body, each independent of the other; this is not observed (or reported) in Liasis. Furthermore, Apodora has a low neural spine on the vertebrae of the neck and body relative to Liasis, a primitive condition (Scanlon & Mackness, 2002). Apodora has darkly pigmented skin, including the lining of the mouth and cloaca, and has an extremely long and deeply forked tongue. According to Parker (1982), Apodora appears to easily slough skin; this has not been observed by us and has not been reported in Liasis. Apodora has thermoreceptive pits in the rostral while Liasis species generally do not (individual specimens of L. mackloti may show shallow rostral pits, (Barker and Barker, pers. obs.; McDowell, 1975). When corrected for size (SVL), the eggs of Apodora are relatively larger than those of any of the four Liasis species with whose eggs which we have experience (Barker and Barker, unpubl. data).”Description (tornieri): “Rostral two times as broad as deep, clearly visible from above, with a shallow groove on each side; internasals one time and a half as long as broad, two thirds the length of the praefrontals, which separate the posterior pair of small praefrontals; frontal about one time and one fourth as long as broad, as long as its distance from the rostral; a pair of parietals; a single large loreal; a large praeocular, with a very small subocular below it (on one side); three elongate postoculars; eleven upper labials, first to third with a groove, fifth and sixth entering the eye; three posterior lower labials grooved. Scales in 65 rows; ventrals 375; anal entire; subcaudals 86, of which the first four are paired, the next four single, 65 paired and 13 single. Brown above; head with dark dots. Lower surface yellowish-white. Length of head and body I 330 mm.; tail 220 mm.; attains a length of 2 M. (After WERNER; not seen by me).” (de Rooij 1917)
Aspidites melanocephalus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis (genus): Premaxillary teeth absent. Majority of subcaudals single. Also distinguished from Liasis and Python by absence of sensory pits on labials and rostra!. Description (genus): Head shields symmetrical. Nasal entire. Parietals fragmented but discern- xxx ible, usually two symmetrical lobate fragments, sometimes in contact but usually separated by small scales. Ventrals 273-359. Subcaudals 43-69. Anal scale entire. Midbody scale rows 43-63. Dorsal scales smooth, moderately imbricate, apically rounded. Juveniles strongly banded and compressed. (Smith 1981)Diagnosis (species): Distinguished from A. ramsayi by its glossy black or deep reddish-brown hood. (Smith 1981)Description (species): Largest specimen 3023 mm (Smith and Johnstone 1981). Head 1.5-2.1 times as long as wide (N 17, mean 1.6). Neck distinct from head, but not prominently so. Rostral 1.5-2.0 times as wide as high. Two pairs of prefrontals, anterior pair always and posterior pair almost always in contact. One loreal (N 38). Preoculars 2 (N 38). Postoculars 3 (11% of specimens) or 4 (89% of specimens) (N 36, mean 3.9). Anterior temporals 3 (18% of specimens), 4 (65% of specimens), 5 (11% of specimens) or 6 (6% of specimens) (N 36, mean 4.1). Upper labials 10 (47% of specimens), 11 (47% of specimens) or 12 (6% of specimens) (N 36, mean 10.5), usually fifth and sixth entering orbit, sometimes the sixth (once sixth and seventh). Lower labials 14 (12% of specimens), 15 (18% of specimens), 16 (35% of specimens), 17 (26% of specimens) or 18 (9% of specimens) (N 34, mean 16.1). Ventral 315-359 (N 18, mean 330.4). Subcaudals 63-69 (N 18, mean 66.1), mostly entire. Ventral plus subcaudals 380-427 (N 16, mean 395.9). Scale rows at midbody 50-60 (N 14, mean 53.2), at neck 37-46 (N 13, mean 47.1, decreasing by 6-17), at tail 35-37 (N 8, mean 36.1, decreasing by 15-20). (Smith 1981)Coloration of adult. Head with glossy black or deep reddish-brown hood, extending 16-26 scales beyond the parietals. Back light brown to reddish- xxx brown with many irregular dark brown to black bands 2-4 scales wide on flanks, usually increasing in width on back, often to extent of coalescing along vertebral line and sometimes extending on to creamish ventrals and subcaudals as vague blotches and smudges. Bands discernible at all ages. In juveniles contrast between ground colour and bands is more pronounced and the black or dark reddish-brown of the head extends back on to the anterior ventrals. (Smith 1981)
Aspidites ramsayi	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from A. melanocephalus by absence of dark hood.  (Smith 1981)Description: Largest specimen 2260 mm. Head 1.2-2.0 times as long as wide (N 23, mean 1.5). Neck distinct from head but not prominently so. Rostral 1.0-2.0 (mostly 1.5) times as wide as high. Two pairs of prefrontals; anterior pair always, posterior pair almost always in contact. Two (rarely 3) loreals. Preoculars 1 (4% of specimens), 2 (91% of specimens) or 3 (5% of specimens) (N 56, mean 2.0). Postoculars 3 (4% of specimens), 4 (48% of specimens), 5 (39% of specimens) or 6 (9% of specimens) (N 56, mean 4.5). Anterior temporals 4 (4% of specimens), 5 (44% of specimens), 6 (33% of specimens), 7 (15% of specimens), 8 (2% of specimens) or 9 (2% of specimens) (N 46, mean 5.7). Upper labials 11 (9% of specimens), 12 (46% of specimens), 13 (32% of specimens) or 14 (13% of specimens) (N 54, mean 12.5), usually sixth and seventh entering orbit. Lower labials 14 (2% of specimens) (N 54, mean 16.6). Ventral 273-304 (N 27, mean 286.4). Subcaudals 43-53 (N 28, mean 47.5), mostly entire. Ventral plus subcaudals 317-346 (N 26, mean 332.4). Scale rows at midbody 43-63 (N 26, mean 53.2), at neck 32-42 (N 21, mean 43.5, decreasing by 3-16), before vent 33-51 (N 19, mean 37.8, decreasing by 6-21). (Smith 1981)Coloration of adult. Head, body and tail uniform brown except for vague darker bands along vertebral column (remnants of juvenile bands). Ventrals yellow with irregular pinkish-brown markings. (Smith 1981)Coloration of juveniles. Supraoculars and tip of snout dark brownish-black. Back and top of tail pale brown with many dark brown bands of regular width (4-6 scales), nearly always coalescing along vertebral line, always wider than interspaces. Scales at edge of bands solid brown, inner scales of bands only edged darker brown. Ventrals (but not throat) brown. (Smith 1981)
Bothrochilus boa	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: “Rostral about twice as broad as deep, not visible from above; internasals more broad than long, two fifths to one third the length of the prefrontals; one pair of praefrontals; frontal as long as broad or a little more long; two pair of parietals; loreal small; one large praeocular; two (three) postoculars; nine to twelve upper labials, two or three entering the eye; three or four of the posterior lower labials pitted. Scales in 35-39 rows; ventral 245-267; anal entire; subcaudals 47-52. Brown with black rings or uniform blackish-brown; a light spot behind the eye. Young specimens with black and orange rings.Size: Length of head and body 830 mm.; tail 120 mm.; largest specimen known 1540 mm.” (de Rooij 1917)
Leiopython albertisii	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Leiopython albertisii is distinguishable from Leiopython hoserae, Leiopython bennettorum, and Leiopython huonensis sp. nov. by the presence of two pairs of parietals. A pair of large scales often separated from the median line by one or more small interparietal follows the anterior pair (Fig. 2A). It further differs from the former two species and from Leiopython fredparkeri sp. nov. by the presence of whitish postocular spots, and can easily be distinguished from Leiopython bennettorum in the number of loreals and prefrontals (Table 3), the average number of postoculars), dorsal midbody rows, ventrals, and subcaudal scales. Leiopython albertisii further differs from Leiopython hoserae and from Leiopython fredparkeri in lighter dorsal color and in having a yellowish flank (Parker, 1982; Barker and Barker, 1994; O’Shea, 1996, 2007), smaller average body size in hatchlings and adults, and additionally from Leiopython hoserae by molecular evidence (see Fig. 4). Leiopython albertisii can be distinguished from Leiopython biakensis sp. nov. by higher average subcaudal (71.5 +/- 2.85; range = 65–79, N = 30 vs. 67.5 +/3.54; range = 65–70, N = 2), and supralabial scale counts (12.9 +/- 0.28; range = 12–13, N = 30 vs. 11.8 +/- 0.35; range = 11–12, N = 2) along with a higher number of supralabials entering the eye (3.0 +/- 0.18; range = 2–3, N = 30 vs. 2, N = 2) [SCHLEIP 2008].Diagnosis (albertisii): Leiopython albertisii is distinguished from L. meridionalis by its dark yellow or golden dorsal colouration (versus dark brown or black in L. meridionalis); presence of small specks of white patterning on the postocular scales in most specimens; and generally two parietal scale pairs (as opposed to a single pair in most L. meridionalis). Compared to L. meridionalis, L. albertisii possesses a shorter and nar- rower head size relative to its body (Natusch and Lyons, 2012). Leiopython albertisii also differs from L. meridionalis in having a lower mean number of dorsal midbody rows and a higher mean number of ventral scales (259–283 versus 258–275, respectively). However, an overlap in the ranges of the scale counts, coupled with small sample sizes for this wide-ranging taxon, renders these aspects of scalation of doubtful diagnostic value. Importantly, L. albertisii is easily differentiated from L. meridionalis on the basis of molecular genetic data (Natusch et al. 2020).Description (albertisii): Leiopython albertisii is a large and robust python spe- cies growing to almost 2.5 m in total length and ~ 3.5 kg in mass in wild (Natusch and Lyons, 2012). The head is black or dark brown dorsally and is distinct from the neck. The jaws are white ventrally with thin black bars on the anterior edges of the supralabial and infralabial scales. A white postocular spot is present in most specimens (McDowell, 1975; Schleip, 2008). The body is dark yellow or golden dorsally, becoming lighter laterally and fading to white or cream on the ventral surface. The head and body are strongly iridescent. The sexes do not appear to be sexually dimorphic (Natusch and Lyons, 2012, Natusch et al. 2020).Diagnosis (biakensis). This species differs from Leiopython albertisii in having only two labials entering the orbit (100%, N 5 2) and in lower ventral scale counts (271 6 1.41; range 5 270–272, N 5 2) than found in specimens from the western part of Papua (278 6 2.49; range 5 274–283, N 5 13; KW-test: x21 5 4.99, P , 0.05; see also Brongersma, 1956). However, ventral scales counts are in the range of specimens from PNG. It differs from Leiopython fredparkeri in the head scale arrangement, with this species having large and wide posterior parietals, whereas Leiopython fredparkeri shows two slender elongate posterior parietal scales (Fig. 2). It further differs from the latter species by the presence of whitish postocular spots, and additionally from Leiopython huonensis and Leiopython hoserae in having two pairs of parietals. It is also distinguishable from Leiopython bennettorum in the number of prefrontals and loreals (Schleip 2008).Diagnosis (huonensis): This species differs from Leiopython albertisii, Leiopython biakensis, and Leiopython fredparkeri in having only one pair of parietals followed by small, irregular scales (Fig. 2C, 6I). It can be distinguished from Leiopython bennettorum by the lower number of loreal and prefrontal scales as well as a lower average number of postoculars (KW-test: x21 5 3.95, P , 0.05) and from Leiopython hoserae by the scale arrangement posterior to the parietal scales showing small, irregular scales. It also differs from Leiopython albertisii (KW-test: x21 5 10.31, P , 0.001) and from Leiopython hoserae (KW-test: x21 5 5.35, P , 0.05) by lower average ventral scale counts. Additionally, it can be distinguished from the latter taxon by the presence of the whitish postocular spot (Schleip 2008).
Liasis fuscus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: “Rostral more broad than deep, just visible from above, not pitted; internasals more long than broad, half the length of the praefrontals, which extend to the frontal or are separated from it by a small shield; a second pair of much smaller praefrontals, separated from one another by the first pair of prefrontals; frontal about one time and a half as long as broad, slightly shorter than its distance from the tip of the snout; one or two pair of parietals; a single large loreal; one prae-  and two postoculars; ten to twelve upper labials, first with a shallow pit, fifth and sixth or sixth and seventh entering the eye; three or four posterior lower labials pitted. Scales in 47 or 49 rows; ventrals 275-291; anal entire; subcaudals 65-72. Brown above; yellowish below. Length of head and body 1 140 mm.; tail 190 mm.” (de Rooij 1917)
Liasis mackloti	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description (genus): “Head distinct from neck, covered with symmetrical shields; nostril in a semi-divided nasal; a pair of internasals, separating the nasals; rostral and upper labials pitted or without pits; some lower labials pitted; eye rather small; pupil vertical; praemaxillary toothed; anterior teeth very long. Body cylindrical or a little compressed, covered with small smooth scales. Tail moderate or short, not or very slightly prehensile; subcaudals in two rows or the greater part only.” (de Rooij 1917)Description (species): “Rostral more broad than deep, scarcely visible from above, with a feeble pit on each side; internasals a little more long than broad, hardly half the length of the praefrontals, which separate the posterior, smaller pair of prefrontals; frontal about one time and a half as long as broad, as long as its distance from the tip of the snout; a pair of parietals, followed by smaller shields; a large loreal; one prae- and two postoculars; eleven upper labials, first and second pitted, fifth and sixth entering the eye; five posterior lower labials pitted. Scales in 49 -55 rows; ventrals 267-302; anal entire; subcaudals 64--49. Coloration: Brown above, with scattered, small, yellowish and dark brown spots. Lower surface yellowish or brownish. Length of head and body 1420 mm.; tail 260 mm.” (de Rooij 1917)
Simalia amethistina	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis (genus): Barker et al. 2015: 13Original description: see Bauer & Lavilla 2021
Morelia bredli	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description of Holytype: Rostral visible from above, slightly longer than broad, with a pair of oblique sensory pits. Supralabials 14, with the seventh and eighth on each side entering the orbit. First three supralabials with prominent sensory pits, fourth without a distinct pit but an obscure elongate mark is present. Infralabials 20, the ninth to fifteenth on the right side and the tenth to sixteenth on the left with deep rectangular sensory pits, sunk in a longitudinal groove. Frontal, nasals, internasals and a pair of post-internasal scutes unfragmented and obvious, remainder of the head scutes fragmented into small subequal scales which are juxtaposed anteriorly, but become slightly imbricate posteriorly. Orbit surrounded by 15 scales (including supralabials); 11 scales in median line between orbits (excluding supraoculars). Mental groove bordered by 12 scales on each side, mostly smaller than adjacent gulars, not in contact with anterior infralabials. Dorsal scales smooth, weakly imbricate, rhomboidal posteriorly; first row large, slightly more than half as broad as ventrals. At fifteenth ventral, dorsal scales 46 rows; at median ventral, 54 rows at fifteenth ventral anterior to cloaca, 26 rows. Ventral 293. Subcaudals 90, all divided. Anal entire. Cloacal spurs present. One tooth on left side of premaxilla; (tooth on right side missing). Maxillary teeth; 7 on right maxilla (estimated nine missing), 8 on left (estimated eight missing), estimated total maxillary teeth 16; Palatine teeth: 6 on left (estimated four missing), 10 on right (intact series); Dentary teeth: 10 on left (estimated six missing), 16 on right (intact series). (Gow 1981) Description of Paratypes: As for holotype, with the following variations (figures underlined refer to holotype). Labial and orbit scale counts taken from left side of specimens. Percentages refer to total material examined. Supralabials: 13 (20%); 14 (20%); 15 (60%); (N=10, mean 14.4). Supralabials entering the orbit : Sixth, seventh and eighth (30%); seventh, eighth and ninth (60%) eighth and ninth (10%); Infralabials: 19 (30%); 20 (60%); 21 (10%); (N=10, mean 19.8). Infralabials with sensory pits: ninth to sixteenth (20%); Tenth to sixteenth (70%); eleventh to seventeenth (10%). Frontal plate unfragmented and obvious in 60% of specimens, fragmented and obscure in 40% of specimens. Orbit surrounded by: 13 scales (10%); 14 (10%); 15 (60%) 16 (10%); 17 (10%); (N=10, mean 15.1). Scales in a median line between the orbits: 8 (10%); 9 (10%); 10 (30%); 11 (40%); 12 (10%); (N=10, mean 10.3). Python spilotus variegatus examined: Northern Territory (N.T.M.): Oenpelli, R1191, R1198; 19 km S.W. of Oenpelli, R3421; 5 km W. of the South Alligator River crossing (on Arnhem Highway), R6252; Darwin, R2040, R2114, R2564, R3317, R5290, R6253, R6534; 25 km S., 8 km E. of Noonamah, R4772; Melville Island, R1202; Bathurst Island, R5276; Groote Eylandt, R6218, R7479, R7480, R7481. Colour notes: As in Python spilotus variegatus, dorsal color pattern extremely variable. Dorsal colouration in life reddish to dark brown with numerous irregular, pale fawn to yellow, dark edge blotches, stripes and bars. This patterning is darker and thus more intense posteriorly (Plate 1). Vental surface creamish white, posterior ventral irregularly edged with black on anterior margins and sides. Head coloration same as dorsum; supralabial area creamish, with brown blotches. Colouration of infralabials and gulars as for ventral surface. Dorsal patterning of hatchling P. bredli resembles adults, but more pronounced due to brighter colouration. Hatchlings of Northern Territory P. s. variegatus, (less than 500 mm total length) pinkishred with indistinct patterning. (Gow 1981)Comparison of Python bredli and Python spilotus variegatus: Table 1 compares the more important meristic characteristics that separate these two species. P. bredli differs markedly from P. spilotus variegatus in the number of dorsal scale rows at the fifteenth and median ventrals, and the number of scales in a median line between orbits (excluding supraoculars). Overlap occurs in all other characters listed. In P. bredli labial counts are normally higher by about two scales. In addition the supralabials which enter the orbit (Figure 1.), the number (Table 1) and placement of infralabial sensory pits (Figure 2), and the number of scales which surround orbit (including supralabials) (Figure 3.) are also generally more numerous. Figure 4 show the head scalation of both P. bredli (4a) and P. spilotus variegatus. (4b). Scales in the loreal and frontal regions are noticeably smaller and more numerous in P. bredli. There is little difference In body proportions, apart from total length, in which P. bredli easily exceeds P. spilotus variegatus (Table 1). Smaller specimens (less than 1500 mm total length) of both species, are more compressed laterally than large adults. In the Northern Territory the two species are geographically separated by more than 500 km. (Gow 1981)
Morelia carinata	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from other species of Python by having keeled dorsal scales (Smith 1981)Description of holotype: tail not prehensile. Cloacal spurs present. Rostral with angular apex, and a pair of oblique sensory pits; almost as wide as high, penetrating deeply between the internasals which are separ- ated by 2 small median scales. Anterior prefrontals broken into 4 symmetric parts, anterior pair of fragments in contact, posterior pair separated by a scale. Frontal oval (9 x 8 mm). Four supraoculars (third largest) separated from frontal by a row of small scales. Remainder of head shields asymmetric- ally divided. Loreals small, numerous, sharply differentiated from other scales. Upper labials 14 and 15, seventh and eighth entering orbit (both sides), first 3 on each side with an oblique pit. Lower labials 16 and 17 with pits in labials 9-14, and 10-14. Mental groove deep, bordered on each side by first lower labial and about 15 scales, all much smaller than adjacent gular scales. Ventrals 298. Anal scale entire. Subcaudals 83, all but numbers 4-6 and 73-80 divided. Scale rows at midbody 45; at neck 41 and at tail 30. Dorsal imbricate, scales in first and last 4 or 5 rows smooth, remainder with a short, blunt keel (keels strongest on mid-dorsal scales). (Smith 1981) Size: Total length 1975 mm (SVL 1760, tail 215). Tail 12.2% of SVL. (Smith 1981) Coloration: Head brownish, unpatterned except for 2 vague whitish streaks on the temporals. Ground colour of dorsum brownish -white with dark brown varie- gation and blotches. Ground colour becoming paler and blotches darker posteriorly, thus increasing contrast in pattern. Ventrals mostly off-white, every second to fifth smudged brown. (Smith 1981)
Nyctophilopython oenpelliensis	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis and definition (genus): A lineage endemic to northern Australia that underwent a rapid divergence from Antaresia and Morelia, and showing intermediate traits between the two. They are slender and long snakes, with adults up to over 4 meters in total length, larger than any Morelia and especially the dwarfed Antaresia. Pale brownish to olive coloration, with longitudinal rows of large dark blotches. Enlarged nasal, internasal, anterior pre-frontals, supraocular and frontal symmetrical head shields. The posterior prefrontals are usually several smaller asymmetrical scales. In Morelia head scales are smaller and more divided, in Antaresia and Simalia there are no small divided posterior prefrontals. Heat pits present on rostral, first three supralabials and posterior infralabial scales. They are the only pythons with over 400 ventral scales. Along with Aspidites, this is one of the two python genera that are endemic to Australia (Esquerré et al. 2020).Diagnosis: “A genus of large elongate pythons possessing strongly prehensile tails, deeply pitted anterior labials, indistinct parietal shield formation that results in almost total dorsal head scale fragmentation, fragmented loreals, smooth body scales in 70 rows, from about 425 to 450 ventral scutes, entire anal scale, 155 to 165 subcaudals (anterior few entire, remainder divided), oviparous reproduction and a maximum size of around 5 metres. Known only from the extreme northern sector of the Northern Territory.” (Wells & Wellington 1985: 42).
Morelia spilota	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis (genus): This is a genus of pythonid snakes of large size, with adult lengths of > 2 m to 5.5 m. This genus is shown to be a monophyletic clade separated from all other python clades on the basis of molecular characters as illustrated in Figure 6 (in Barker et al. 2015, Pyron et al., 2013). Likewise, the morphological analysis illustrated in Figure 1 (Kluge, 1993) shows the split as internal to Morelia. Simalia shares a common ancestor with the clade of pythons comprised of Morelia, Apodora, Liasis, Aspidites, Antaresia, Leiopython, and Bothrochilus.Simalia can be separated from Apodora, Aspidites, Antaresia, and Liasis by the presence and condition of the thermoreceptive pits on the supralabials and rostral. Species in Simalia have two large, deep thermoreceptive pits on the rostral scale and well developed thermoreceptive pits on 2–5 anterior supralabials; Aspidites and Bothrochilus have no thermoreceptive pits on the rostral and supralabials; Antaresia and Liasis typically have no pits in the rostral. Apodora has shallow pits on the rostral and anterior 2–3 supralabials. Leiopython varies in the condition of labial pits; most have a pitted rostral and the first 2–3 supralabials may have pits.Simalia have subloreal scales, while Kluge (1993) did not observe subloreal scales in Bothrochilus or Leiopython; species in Simalia have > 4 loreal scales while Bothrochilus and Leiopython have 1–2. Simalia has a strongly prehensile tail, while the tail of Aspidites, Antaresia, Leiopython, and Liasis is weakly prehensile (McDowell, 1975).Simalia can be distinguished from Morelia by the condition of the head scalation. Species in Simalia have large plate-like head scales identified as supraoculars, frontals, and one or more pairs of parietals. Simalia oenpelliensis varies from this formula, and has small parietals and irregular scalation posterior to large supraoculars that are in full contact with a large frontal.The only large scales that might be considered ‘platelike’ on the dorsal surface of the head of Morelia species are small internasals and anterior prefrontals on the front of the snout. M. carinata is one exception and it typically has a single round frontal centered between the eyes and surrounded by small scales, separated from contact with relatively large anterior supraoculars (Barker et al. 2015: 13).DIAGNOSIS: A medium to large python similar in most respects to the others in the genus Morelia. It is separated from one of its closest relatives Morelia macburniei sp. nov. (see below) by a suite of characteristics including a lower incidence of scale anomalies particularly with regards to ventral scales in the from of longitudinally split ventrals, half ventrals, transversely divided ventrals or incompletely transversely divided ventrals, remnant or partially inserted ventrals or incompletely formed ventrals (such as in two halves).This species is differentiated from Morelia macburniei sp. nov. from St. Francis Island by having more rhomboidal-shaped dorsal scales as opposed to having lanceolate-shaped dorsal scales. Morelia mippughae sp. nov. is separated from the closely related Morelia metcalfei (the Murray/Darling form), (which it would have previously keyed out as using existing (pre 2002 taxonomy)) by a suite of characteristics including it’s dorsal colour pattern. Morelia mippughae sp. nov. is pale reddish brown dorsally, with broad transverse black-edged patches on the top of the back and a wide pale lateral zone for about a third of its length. [from HOSER 2003]Morelia mippughae sp. nov. is separated from all other Morelia by colouration and patterns as seen from a comparison of specimens, comparative DNA properties and distribution. [from HOSER 2003]Diagnosis (variegata): Distinguished from P . spilotus imbricatus by having less imbricate posterior dorsals which are rhomboidal (not lanceolate) and more ventrals and subcaudals 259-294 (N 14, mean 280) V. 239-276 and 75-89 (N 14, mean 84.1) v. 63-82 respectively. Sum of ventrals plus subcaudals 336-385 (N 14, mean 364) v. 312-351. (Smith 1981)Description (variegata): Smith 1981
Morelia viridis	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Morelia viridis is easily distinguished from all subspecies of M. azurea by the following characters: presence of a single juvenile morph (yellow vs. yellow or red in M. azurea); presence of a tightly knitted row of white vertebral scales along the vertebral ridge, or white ‘rosettes’ along the vertebral ridge in the Aru Islands population; and a dark shade of green coloration along the vertebral ridge, as opposed to uniform green in M. azurea (Table 1, Supplementary Material II). Most populations of M. viridis also possess short, stubby tails and con- siderably lower subcaudal scale counts vs. long, tapering tails and high subcaudal scale counts in M. azurea (Table 1, Supplementary Material II). The exceptions are populations from Milne Bay and the north coast of Oro and Morobe Provinces to near Lae, Papua New Guinea, which typically have long, tapering tails similar to M. azurea. Morelia viridis further differs from M. a. azurea and M. a. utaraensis in that juveniles possess a single iris band running horizontally through the eye (as opposed to a triple iris band; Table 1; Supplementary Material II). It further differs from M. a. utaraensis in that juveniles have a darkened tail tip and a broken pattern following the vertebral ridge vs. a light- colored tail and continuous pattern. Morelia viridis further differs from M. a. azurea by undergoing a relatively rapid color change to become uniform green in adulthood vs. delayed colour change with variable coloration). [from Natusch et al. 2019]
Python anchietae	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: The dorsum of the head is the same color as the body. Two stripes, a yellow one with a black one beneath it, run along the sides of the head on each side from the nostril through the eye to the neck. The upper and lower labials are pale. The venter is whitish. The nasal may be single or divided. There are 4-5 preoculars, 2 or more postoculars, 1or more supraoculars, and 2-3 suboculars. There are 15-18 perioculars and about 10 interoculars. There are 12-15 upper labials, none of which is in contact with the eye. Four or five of the upper labials have sensory pits. There are 15-16 lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 55-61 straight rows. There are 253-267 ventrals and 46-57 divided subcaudals. The cloacal scale may be single or divided (Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 66).
Python curtus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: Top of body is brownish grey, with a series of longitudinal dark, irregular sub-rectangular blotches, sometimes as broad as body; flanks have a longitudinal series of large blotches with black edges; sides of snout have dark stripes; post-ocular pattern comprises black triangular blotches, widening to 4-6 scales at angle of jaws and coalescing with anterior labial blotch of neck; has a pale post-ocular stripe with dark smudges; chin and belly are plain cream or white. Body is short and robust; head is elongate, flat and distinct from neck; vertebral region is ridged; tail is short; cloacal spurs are present (Das 2012: 16).
Python molurus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis (genus): Diagnosis: Maxillary, palatine and pterygoid bones movable; trans-palatine present; pterygoid extending to quadrate or mandible; supratemporal present, attached scalelike to skull, suspending quadrate. Both jaws with teeth, anterior ones of both jaws elongated and curved; a coronoid present; vestiges of pelvis and legs terminating in a clawlike spur visible on each side of vent. Head with enlarged scales; part of labials bearing pits; scales numerous, in 60-75 scalerows. (Taylor 1965: 664)Description (species): Thick-bodied, smooth-scaled. Head broader than neck; at snout tip and first two upper lip scales have heat sensitive pits. Upper surface eye has vertical pupil. Scale of head has large scales of different shapes and sizes. Yellowish to brown with asymmetrical dark brown, black-edged blotches. Tip of arrow-head mark on head indistinct in adults; tongue and parts of head pale pink. Two dark streaks on side of head, one below, the other through/behind eye. Underside white or yellowish. (Russell's Viper has keeled scales and a pattern similar in color, but with symmetrical blotches that are are either oval with pointed ends, or round. Also, the upper head scales are small). (Whitaker & Captain 2007: 78)Scalation (species): Scales in 60-75 rows, smooth. Ventral 253-270, distinctly narrower than width of belly; anal undivided; subcaudals 58-73, paired. Rostral and first 2 supralabials pitted; supralabials 11-13 (6th or 7th touching eye). (Whitaker & Captain 2007: 78)
Python natalensis	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: P. natalensis can be distinguished from P. sebae in the pattern on the side of the head: in P. natalensis, the dark patch in front of and posterior to the eye is paler and narrower than in P. sebae, giving the appearance of a dark stripe as opposed to a yellow stripe at the level of the eye. The overall coloration of P. natalensis, though similar to P. sebae, is drabber. The scales on the dorsum of the head are small and medium sized in P. natalensis as opposed to medium and large sized in P. sebae, and there are small differences in some of the other head scale counts. The nasal may be single or divided. There are 2-3 preoculars, 3-4 postoculars, 2-3 supraoculars, and a variable number of suboculars. There are 8-13 perioculars and 6-10 interoculars. There are 10-16 upper labials, none of which is in contact with the eye. There are sensory pits on two of the upper labials, as well as smaller ones on three of the lower labials. There are 17-20 lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 76-99 straight rows. There are 260-291 ventrals and 63-84 divided subcaudals. The cloacal scale may be single or divided (Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 67).
Python regius	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: The dorsal coloration is dark overall with a pattern of large round or oval yellow spots outlined in black. The dorsum of the head is black. There is a yellow stripe from nostril to eye on each side of the head and two yel- low stripes posterior to the eye. The upper and lower labials are pale. The venter is whitish. The nasal is single. There are 2-4 preoculars, 3-4 postoculars, 1-2 supraocu- lars, and no suboculars. There are 9-12(5) or (5,6) or (6) upper labials. Three or four of the upper labials have sensory pits. There are 15 or so lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 51-63 straight rows. There are 191-207 ventrals and 28-37 divided sub- caudals. The cloacal scale may be single or divided ((Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 69).
Malayopython reticulatus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis (genus): A genus of pythonine snakes, of large to gigantic size (adult total length reportedly to 10 m). Differentiated from Python (s.s.) by having the supralabial thermoreceptive pits less well deﬁned than the infralabial pits (converse arrangement in Python); by infralabial pits set in a longitudinal groove deﬁned ventrally by a longitudinal fold; colour pattern of the suborbital supralabial region similar to the rest of the supralabials, compared with Python, in which there is a dark suborbital patch; elongate medial anterior process of the ectopterygoid, which extends much further anteriorly than the lateral anterior process, compared with subequal processes in Python (excluding P. curtus); and by hemipenial morphology (McDowell et al., 175); not known for timoriensis). Otherwise most similar to Morelia and Liasis, from which it can be differentiated (along with species of Python) by having the suborbital portion of the maxilla without any lateral ﬂare or projection; the mandibular foramen of the compound bone lying below the posterior end of the dentary tooth row, rather than fully posterior to it; a large medially divided frontal; high midbody scale count (54 or more). [from McDowell, 175 and Kluge, 13]Diagnosis (Malayopython): see Barker et al. 2015: 14Original description: see Bauer & Lavilla 2021Description (species): Like molurus in head scalation, differing as follows: 4 anterior supralabials deeply pitted ; 2 or 3 anterior and 5 or 6 posterior infralabials feebly pitted 6th or 7th supra-labial touching the eye; no suboculars. Scales in 70 to 80 rows. V. 297-332; C. 75-102, mostly divided. Anal entire.Coloration: Light brown or yellowish above with a dorsal series of large darker brown, circular, oval or rhomboidal spots, often confuent with one another: each spot is edged with black and outside again with yellow, these two colours descending upon the Hanks in a regular series of vertical bars or V-shaped upon marks, each one of which encloses a white spot; whitish or vellowish below, the outer scale roWS spotted or' dappled with brown. A black streak along the middle of the head and another on each side from the eye to the anglo of the jaw.Total length. The 'Reticulated Python 18 the largest snake living to-day, the South American Anaconda running it closely for second place. Authentic measurements of specimens that have been killed show that it reaches a length of 27 or 28 feet. Greater lengths have been recorded, but they cannot be relied upon. (Smith 1943: 109)
Python sebae	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: The overall coloration is dark, made up of a dorsal pattern in black, brown, and yellow of large round, oval, or irregular blotches with dark centers and pale edges. On the sides of the head there is a yellow stripe at the level of the eye, with a broad dark blotch on the side of the head in front of and posterior to the eye. The upper labials are generally dark with pale edges. The lower labials are pale. The venter is whitish with dark spots. The scales on the dorsum of the head are medium and large sized. The nasal is semi-divided. There are 2-4 preoculars, 3-4 postoculars, 1-2 supraoculars, and 2-3 suboculars. There are 9-12 perioculars and 4 interoculars. There are 11-17 upper labials, none of which is in contact with the eye. There are sensory pits on two of the upper labials, as well as smaller ones on three of the lower labials. There are 15-23 lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 71-99 straight rows. There are 259-294 ventrals and 55-80 divided subcaudals. The cloacal scale is usually single but sometimes divided (Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 69).
Malayopython timoriensis	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: “Rostral as broad as deep, just visible from above, with a deep pit on each side; internasals much more long than broad, as long as the anterior praefrontals; a second pair of prae-frontals; supraocular and frontal large; two pair of parietals; loreal region covered with small shields (fig. 13); a large and a small praeocular; three postoculars; twelve upper labials, four anterior deeply pitted, sixth entering the eye; five of the lower labials pitted. Scales in 60 rows; ventrals 288; anal entire; subcaudals 22 +?, last 9 single. Reddish-brown above, with blotches of dark scales; head with a median dark line. Lower surface yellow. Length of head and body 793 mm.; tail (broken) 45 mm.” (de Rooij 1917: 25)
Python brongersmai	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: Top of body is red, reddish brown, charcoal-grey, pale grey or brown; an indistinct narrow, dark stripe is present along middle of forehead; supralabials are dark; a pale, narrow post-ocular stripe extends to angle of jaws; dorsal pattern comprises vertebral spots; dark blotches on flanks are rounded and set within paler areas; belly is anteriorly cream and posteriorly dark, with grey smudges and blotches. Body is short and robust; head is elongate, flat and distinct from neck; vertebral region is ridged; tail is short; cloacal spurs are present (Das 2012: 16).Coloration: Shine et al. (1998) classified this species into four types, based on their predominant dorsal colour: brown, orange, red or yellow. In the study area, all blood pythons are brown or orange-brown at hatching, and develop their adult colours gradually. The analyses of DNA sequence data by Shine et al. revealed no genetic differences between the colour morphs of P. brongersmai (S. Keogh et al., unpublished work; cited in Shine et al.). Studies of captive snakes indicate that all four colour morphs are interfertile and readily interbreed, with offspringfrom a single litter often developing into adults of two or three colour morphs (Barker and Barker 1996; D. and T. Barker, personal communication, cited in Shine et al.). However, the four colour morphs of P. brongersmai differed significantly in most of the traits that Shine et al. measured. In both sexes, for example, red snakes were substantially larger and heavier than yellow snakes.Scalation: The ventral scale count is >167 in brongersmai but <165 in the other forms (GH Rodda, pers. comm.).
Python breitensteini	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: Top of body is pale yellow or tan, with dark sub-rectangular blotches about as wide as body, becoming darker towards tail, or with a fully dark top that turns black posteriorly; scattered pale spots are present on vertebral region, and are more numerous at back of body, where they are elongate and form a vertebral stripe; has a black stripe evident between internasals and occipital, fusing with dark pattern on neck; sides of head are darker than forehead, with dark flecks and a broad dark post-ocular stripe; a pale post-ocular stripe runs to angle of jaws; chin and belly are plain cream, sometimes with brown spots. Body is short and robust; head is elongate, flattened and distinct from neck; eyes are small with a vertical pupil; vertebral region is ridged; some infralabials have weak pits; tail is short; cloacal spurs are present (Das 2012: 15)Anterior parietals are broadly in contact in P. breitensteini but not or only barely in P. curtus (G.H. Rodda, pers. comm.).
Leiopython fredparkeri	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Leiopython meridionalis is distinguished from L. albertisii by dark grey, brown or black dorsal colouration (versus dark yellow or golden in L. albertisii); absence of small specks of white patterning on the postocular scales in all specimens; generally a single pair of parietal scales (as opposed to two pairs in most L. albertisii); and a higher mean number of dorsal midbody scales and fewer ventral scales than L. al- bertisii. Relative to its body length, L. meridionalis has a longer and wider head than L. albertisii and preliminary data suggest that L. mer- idionalis grows to a larger maximum body size (Natusch and Lyons, 2012). Leiopython meridionalis is easily differentiated from L. albertisii on the basis of molecular genetic information (Natusch et al. 2020).Description: Leiopython meridionalis is a large and robust python species growing to > 2.5 m in total length and ~ 3.5 kg in mass in wild (Natusch and Lyons, 2012). The head is black dorsally and distinct from the neck. The jaws are white ventrally with thin black bars on the anterior edges of the supralabial and infralabial scales (McDowell, 1975; Schleip, 2008). The body is dark grey or brown to black, becoming lighter laterally and fading to white or cream on the ventral surface. The head and body are strongly iridescent. The sexes do not appear to be sexually dimorphic (Natusch et al. 2020).Diagnosis. Leiopython hoserae can be distinguished from Leiopython fredparkeri, Leiopython albertisii, and Leiopython biakensis by the presence of only one pair of parietals followed by a characteristic scale pattern of two small scales separated from the median line by an elongate scale that gets wider posteriorly (see Fig. 2B, 6C in SCHLEIP 2008). It further differs from the former species in a lower average number of dorsal midbody rows (KW-test: x21 = 5.68, P = 0.05), and from the latter two species by the absence of the whitish postocular spot. Furthermore, Leiopython hoserae exceeds Leiopython albertisii and Leiopython biakensis in adult and hatchling body size and is darker in color (Parker, 1982; Barker and Barker, 1994; O’Shea, 1996). Molecular evidence also supports the separation of Leiopython hoserae from Leiopython albertisii (genetic distance of up to 9.3%). It differs from Leiopython bennettorum in the number of loreals and prefrontals as well as in lower midbody scale row counts (KW-test: x21 = 8.92, P = 0.01) and in the average number of postoculars (KW-test: x21 = 7.19, P = 0.01). Leiopython hoserae can be distinguished from Leiopython huonensis by the absence of the whitish postocular spot, the characteristic scale arrangement in the parietal region (Leiopython huonensis has one pair of parietals followed by small, irregular scales) and in higher ventral scale counts (KW-test: x21 = 6.62, P = 0.05). Leiopython hoserae also occurs in drier and hotter climate conditions than other taxa of the genus (detailed in SCHLEIP 2008).Diagnosis. Leiopython bennettorum is easily distinguishable from all other members of the genus Leiopython by higher loreal scale count and by a second pair of small lateral prefrontals (Fig. 6E, F). Furthermore, higher average midbody scale row and postocular scale counts separate this species from Leiopython hoserae (KWtest: x21 = 8.92, P = 0.01 and x21 = 7.19, P = 0.05), Leiopython huonensis (KW-test: x215 4.48, P = 0.05 and x21 = 3.95, P = 0.05), Leiopython fredparkeri (KW-test: x21 = 5.30, P = 0.05 and x21 = 4.28, P = 0.05), and Leiopython albertisii (KWtest: x21 = 7.98, P = 0.01 and x21 = 14.22, P = 0.001). It can also be distinguished from the latter two species in having only one pair of parietals and, additionally, differs from Leiopython albertisii and Leiopython biakensis by the absence of the whitish postocular spot (contra Hoser, 2000, from Schleip 2008: 658).Diagnosis (montanus). A detailed diagnosis and description can be found in Schleip (2008:658–659 under the heading ‘‘Leiopython bennettorum’’ (given above). Leiopython montanus sp. nov. can be distinguished easily from all other members of the genus Leiopython by a higher loreal scale count and by a second pair of small lateral prefrontals. Furthermore, higher average midbody scale row and postocular scale counts separate this species from L. meridionalis, Leiopython huonensis (Huon White-lipped Python), L. fredparkeri, and L. albertisii (from Schleip 2014, based on 5 specimens).Diagnosis. Leiopython fredparkeri differs from Leiopython albertisii and Leiopython biakensis in the absence of the whitish postocular spot, and in higher infralabial counts (KW-test: x21 5 28.22, P , 0.001 and x21 5 5.06, P , 0.05). It further differs from the former species by lower ventral counts (KW-test: x21 5 7.58, P , 0.01). This species is distinguishable from Leiopython bennettorum by loreal, prefrontal, and lower average postocular scale counts (KW-test: x21 5 4.28, P , 0.05), from Leiopython huonensis by the absence of the whitish postocular spot, and from the latter species and Leiopython hoserae in having two pairs of parietals (Schleip 2008: 659).
Python bivittatus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Large serpents; labials separated from eye by sub-oculars; arrow-shaped mark on head distinct; girth proportionally greater than in reticulatus. (Taylor 1965: 666). Description: Top of body is dark brown or yellowish grey, with a series of 30--40 large, Irregular squarish, black-edged, dark chocolate-grey patches on top and sides of body; has dark and dark grey dorsal and lateral spots; has a sub-ocular stripe; belly is grey with dark spots on outer scale rows. Body is thick and cylindrical; head is lance-shaped, and distinct from neck; sensory pits are present in rostrals and on some supralabials and infralabials; spurs are small; tail is short and prehensile; cloacal spurs are present (Das 2012: 15).Description: Thick-bodied and smooth-scaled. Head broader than neck; eye has vertical pupil. Scale at snout tip and first two upper lip scales have heat sensitive pits. Upper surface of head has large scales of different shapes and sizes. Yellowish to brown with asymmetrical dark brown, black-edged blotches. Tip of arrow-head mark on upper surface of head distinct (even in adults); tongue blue-black; no pink on head. Two dark streaks on side of head one below, the other through/ behind the eye. Underside white or yellowish. (Russell's Viper has keeled scales and a pattern similar in color, but with symmetrical blotches that are are either oval with pointed ends, or round. Also, the upper head scales are small). (Whitaker & Captain 2007: 78)Scalation: Scales in 60-75 rows, smooth. Ventrals 245-270, distinctly narrower than width of belly; anal undivided; subcaudals 58-73, paired. Rostral and first two supralabials pitted; supralabials 11-13, separated from eye by suboculars. (Whitaker & Captain 2007: 78)
Python kyaiktiyo	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: A member of the Python curtus species group, differing from P. breitensteini and P. curtus by the presence of a subocular scale preventing eye- supralabial contact, and from P. breitensteini, P. brongersmai, and P. curtus by 180 or more ventral scales and by the presence of tan ocelli anteriorly in the trunk’s middorsal stripe.
Morelia azurea	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Morelia viridis is easily distinguished from all subspecies of M. azurea by the following characters: presence of a single juvenile morph (yellow vs. yellow or red in M. azurea); presence of a tightly knitted row of white vertebral scales along the vertebral ridge, or white ‘rosettes’ along the vertebral ridge in the Aru Islands population; and a dark shade of green coloration along the vertebral ridge, as opposed to uniform green in M. azurea (Table 1, Supplementary Material II). Most populations of M. viridis also possess short, stubby tails and con- siderably lower subcaudal scale counts vs. long, tapering tails and high subcaudal scale counts in M. azurea (Table 1, Supplementary Material II). The exceptions are populations from Milne Bay and the north coast of Oro and Morobe Provinces to near Lae, Papua New Guinea, which typically have long, tapering tails similar to M. azurea. Morelia viridis further differs from M. a. azurea and M. a. utaraensis in that juveniles possess a single iris band running horizontally through the eye (as opposed to a triple iris band; Table 1; Supplementary Material II). It further differs from M. a. utaraensis in that juveniles have a darkened tail tip and a broken pattern following the vertebral ridge vs. a light- colored tail and continuous pattern. Morelia viridis further differs from M. a. azurea by undergoing a relatively rapid color change to become uniform green in adulthood vs. delayed colour change with variable coloration). [from Natusch et al. 2019]Diagnosis (pulcher): Morphologically, M. a. pulcher differs only subtly from M. azurea utaraensis in having a higher mean number of ventral and subcaudal scales, a single iris band in juvenile specimens, and a dark tail tip (vs. a light-colored tail tip in M. azurea utarensis). [from Natusch et al. 2019]Diagnosis (utaraensis): Morphologically, M. a. utaraensis differs only subtly from M. azurea pulcher in having a lower mean number of ventral and subcaudal scales, a triple iris band in juvenile specimens, and a light tail tip (vs. a dark-colored tail tip in M. azurea pulcher). Morelia a. utaraensis differs from M. a. azurea in having a lower mean number of ventral, supralabial, infralabial and subcaudal scales, a relatively rapid onto- genetic color change, a shorter head and snout, and a fully connected juvenile pattern (vs broken/unconnected patterning in M. a. azurea), and a light tail tip (vs dark in M. a. azurea) [from Natusch et al. 2019]
Morelia imbricata	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from P. spilotus variegatus by having strongly imbricate,lanceolate (not rhomboidal) posterior dorsals, fewer ventrals (239-276 V. 259-294) and fewer subcaudals (63-82 v. 75-89). (Smith 1981)Description: Smith 1981
Antaresia papuensis	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: The clade found in our analyses that we call maculosa c. It differs from Antaresia perthensis by a larger body size (max. SVL 1080 mm vs 670 mm) and a higher number of ventrals (253–284 vs 213–247). It differs from A. childreni by lacking a space between the blotches in the anterior third of the body creating a pale stripe and by normally having more ragged edges on its blotches. It differs from A. m. maculosa and A. m. peninsularis by having a far less contrasted pattern (vs a pattern of large contrasted blotches), with small scattered spots rather than large and dark irregular blotches. It also sometimes displays two or three prefontal scales (vs always four or more). It additionally differs from A. m. peninsularis by sometimes having two postocular scales (vs always three or four).Description. Morphometric data of the type series can be found in Table S6. A small python, with a maximum recorded SVL of 1080 mm. Maximum tail length (TL) is 95 mm, average TL/SVL is 0.094. Average HL/SVL is 0.038, average HL/HW is 1.94. Maximum mid-body girth is 85 mm, and it is on average 1.72 times thicker than the neck.Head scalation comprises large symmetrical shields. One large roughly hexagonal frontal scale. Two parietal scales directly in contact with the frontal, posterior to which scales are largely undifferentiated. Parietals in contact. One large supraocular above each eye. Two to four large prefrontal scales. Two internasal scales. Rostral scale in contact with internasals, nasal and first supralabials. There are 10–12 supralabials with an average of 10.6; and 10–14 infralabials with an average of 12. Four of the infralabials have conspicuous heat pits. There is a single large, anteriorly pointed preocular scale, with sometimes an additional much smaller one between this and the fourth and/or fifth supralabial scales. There are 3–5 irregularly sized loreal scales. Two to four postocular scales. Dorsal scales are smooth, rhomboidal and slightly overlapping. In some cases, these are more elongated anteriorly and becoming more compact towards the tail. Ventral scales are transversally elongated shields; they range from 253 to 284, with an average of 270.6. Anal scale is single (undivided). Subcaudal scales range from 40 to 48 with an average of 42.8, most of them divided but sometimes fused towards the tip of the tail.Background colouration ranges between light to dark brown. There are small and irregular dark brown blotches along the dorsal surface, with ragged edges. There is a slightly iridescent sheen to the skin.
