Amphisbaena alba	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A large, blunt-nosed form of Amphisbaena without fusion of head segments, unicolored when adult, with a high number of segments to a midbody annulus, and lacking a caudal autotomy constriction. Specimens have 198 to 248 body annuli; 13 to 21 caudal annuli; 65 to 85 (30-42 dorsal; 35-46 ventral) segments per midbody annulus; and four to 10 precloacal pores.  (Gans 1962)DESCRIPTION: Meristic data for Brazilian specimens are cited from Vanzolini (1955). Counts by me on non-Brazilian specimens fall within. these ranges. Figures 4 through 6 show views of heads of juvenile and adult; figures 2 and 3, the juvenile color pattern; and figures 1 and 7, the ventral surfaces of cloaca and tail. Preserved specimens are a uniformn yellow-tan, brown, or brownish pink dorsally and slightly lighter ventrally. Juveniles may have a dorsal pattern of irregular darker spots (figs. 2, 3). There is no tendency toward darkening of the segmental centers. For a colored photograph of a live specimen, see Schmidt and Inger (1957, fig. 57). The head scalation shows considerable variability and is often asymmetrical (cf. Brongersma, 1932). The description (following Gans and Alexander, MS) is hence of the general pattern, almost all elements of which have been observed to vary in one specimen or another. An azygous rostral is followed by three pairs of enlarged cephalic shields in contact along the dorsal midline, with the nostrils pierced in the first pair (nasals). The second pair (prefrontals) are the largest segments of the head. There are four supralabials and three infralabials. The first three supralabials are large, and particularly the third one may be split in some individuals (fig. 4). The first two pairs of infralabials are large. The third is narrow and generally widest at its posterior end. There is a single row of temporal (postocular) segments, varying in number, and lying between the fourth supralabial and the frontal. The T-shaped mental is followed by a slightly larger, heart-shaped postmental, often in point contact posterolaterally with a pair of large malars. There are normally two segments in the first postgenial, and two to three in the second postgenial, row. The number of the latter may be increased to five or more by a splitting off of the posteromedial corners of the malars. There is a row of from 12 to 15 postmalars. The snout is blunt, flattened slightly dorsoventrally, and oval in cross section. The upper jaw projects beyond the lower which inserts between the projecting supralabials. The shape of the head is strongly affected by the allometric growth pattern of the temporal musculature (contrast fig. 5 and fig. 6, middle view). The skin bulges away from the skull in the temporal region to an extent sufficient to produce a convex curvature just posterior to the eyes. The middorsal line is more closely attached to the parietal crest of the supraoccipital, so that adults also show a depression between the bulging temporal muscles. One to two dorsal half-annuli insert after the first or second body annulus. The first six to eight annuli are narrowed, and the sixth annulus generally marks the level of the head joint, which is apparent by a noticeable but not conspicuous constriction. The dorsal grooves are poorly defined except on the head and tail. The ventral groove is indicated mainly as a gap between aligned segments. The lateral grooves are well defined, starting gradually after the first fifth of the body. They are often crossed with diagonal fold lines that seem to facilitate adjustment of the skin when the body is twisted. The dorsal segments are much narrower than long; the ventral ones are square at midbody. The precloacal pores lie in a single uninterrupted row of normal-sized or slightly wider segments anterior to the precloacal shield. The precloacals generally number more than 10 elongate, parallel-sided segments. The postcloacals, slightly greater in number, are characterized by a central group of two to four enlarged segments, flanked on each side by a group of very narrow segments, the deep sutures between which enter the cloaca laterally as a series of parallel cross lines. The cloaca may be entirely prolapsed. The tail is of constant diameter up to the blunt end, which is capped by a group of segments with decreased intersegmental differentiation (Gans 1962).
Amphisbaena anaemariae	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: A small species (maximum total length 193 mm). Two preanal pores; 156-170 body annuli; 18-20 tail annuli; autotomy level between third and fourth or between fourth and fifth caudal annuli; 14-16/14-16 segments to a mid-body annulus. (Vanzolini 1997)Description: Body moderately stocky. Tail slightly clavate. Lateral sulci little marked. No dorsal or ventral sulci. Sutures on the dorsal aspect of the head in the following order of increasing length: nasal, frontal, pre- frontal. Parietals and occipitals irregular. Nostril near the antero-inferior angle of the nasal. Upper labials four, second and third large, subequal. Behind the eye two successive rows of three scales each, becoming larger from the bottom up. Symphysial small, in some specimens irregular. Post-symphysial narrow, elongate, somewhat irregular. Lower labials four, the first small, the second very large, the third narrow and elongate, its posterior end sometimes pinched off to form a fourth lower labial. Two median genials (sensu Vanzolini, 1991): a variable number of post-genials; all of these very irregular; one large, regular lateral genial on each side. Dorsal segments regular, narrow and elongate. Medio-ventral segments once and a half as wide as long. Preanal pores two, very small. Six preanal scales, the outer ones very small. Postanals forming a raised semicircle. The first median pair of ventral caudals in some specimens much enlarged. Autotomy constriction between the third and fourth or the fourth and fifth tail annuli. Back a lustrous brown with slightly lighter intersegmental sutures, light enough to cause a just noticeable reticulate pattern. On the flanks and belly there are segments with a dark center and light edges, irregularly distributed and varying in density: the general appearance of the belly varies from practically white to a brown checkerboard. The ventral aspect of the tail may also be a checkerboard, or may present longitudinal series of 5-10 light segments, or still be almost white. All this variation in eight specimens. Rostral, nasals, upper labials and chin region smudgy rose-colored. (Vanzolini 1997)
