Amphisbaena leucocephala	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: A large-sized species of Amphisbaena, without major fusions of head shields; with a rounded snout on a relatively blunt head that continues into the trunk without nuchal constriction or posterior widening; and with large parietals equalling the frontals in size. The form has 233 to 240 body annuli; 26 to 27 caudal annuli, the last two poorly inscribed, and the terminal ones with the segments swollen. The sixth caudal annulus narrows sharply into an autotomy constriction. A midbody annulus has 18 to 20 dorsal and 21 to 22 ventral segments. The precloacal row bears 12 small round pores. Only the lateral sulci are strongly indicated. Specimens are brown dorsally and lighter ventrally, the brown color proceeding to the end of the sixth body annulus, so that the head and neck are light colored. The ventral countershading occurs more or less gradually along the sides, close to the lateral sulcus. There is some tendency for central pigment accentuation on dorsal segments and dropping out of pigment by segments. (Gans 1965).DESCRIPTION: The following description rests primarily on the type as the DZ specimen was not at hand when this was written. Figure 12 shows dorsal, lateral and ventral views of the head, Figure 13, dorsal and ventral views at midbody to indicate segment proportions, and Figure 14 a ventral view of cloaca and tail to characterize appearance of the pore row and the autotomy site. Figure 2 graphs meristic characters in comparison with those of A. pretrei, and Figure 3 shows body proportions. The meristic data are given in Table 1. This is a large-sized species of Amphisbaena of uniform dark brown dorsal and lighter ventral coloration. The dorsal darkening is achieved by a more or less uniform pigmentation of the entire segment, though the fading seems to be accentuated near the segment margins and along the intersegmental raphes and interannular sutures so that the segment centers appear darker. The head anterior to the fifth body annulus and the distal tip of the tail are completely unpigmented. The ventral countershading seems to occur by a dropping out of pigmentation at or near the lateral sulcus; it is not clear whether this occurs by segmental dropouts or by rapid fading. The autotomy annulus shows no special pigmentation. The head segmentation shows no major fusions. It is characterized by the enormous prefrontals and by an asymmetrical pair of parietals, averaging to a size equal to that of the frontals. The snout is relatively blunt and high, but slopes from the level of the parietal to that of the nasals. Temporal bulges are noticeable but not marked. The nuchal constriction is faint and the trunk diameter changes only gradually. The trunk is oval in cross section and shows some vertical compression. The rostral is somewhat larger than the first supralabial and almost invisible in dorsal view. Pairs of rectangular nasals, wide prefrontals more than twice their size, smaller pentagonal frontals, and first parietals equal to these follow in sequence, as may small second (and smaller third) parietals. The posterior edge of the frontals lies along the first portion of the first supralabial, somewhat anterior to the angulus oris. There are three supralabials, the first the smallest, the second the largest. The small and irregularly shaped postsupralabial is approximately one-third the size of the third supralabial. The supralabial sutures run between 450 and 750 anteriorly to the edge of the mouth, except for the posterior edge of the third which curves broadly caudad. The ocular is diamond-shaped, the eye relatively large. The mental roughly corresponds to the rostral in extent along the labial edge. It is somewhat larger than the first supralabial and its central process forms a broad, straight raphe with the much larger postmental. Laterally the postmental is in contact with the small first and very large second infralabials, and with the tips of the large malars, whose lateral extremities reach the elongate third infralabials. The posterior edge of the postmental is enclosed between a pair of dropshaped segments of the first postgenial row. The second postgenial row consists of five segments, the median and lateral ones being wedge-shaped and inserting some slight distance between the segments of the first row. The posterior tips of the elongate third infralabials enclose the ventral part of the first body annulus; nine segments, the lateralmost the widest, lie in the position of postmalars. Dorsally this annulus comprises the postsupralabials, and a very large temporal and a large postocular that contact the lateral edges of the frontals and (asymmetrically) the parietals. The second body annulus splits dorsally to form a dorsal intercalated half-annulus, all of the segments of this area being enlarged, irregular, and variously polygonal. There are 233 to 240 body annuli from the back of the third supralabials up to and including the pore-bearing precloacals. The ventral portions of the second through seventh annuli show some complexing and are composed of rounded rather than rectangular segments. The third through ninth annuli are narrower on their lateral and dorsal aspects than are the following ones and the interannular raphes appear capable of greater bending in that they are wide and filled with tiny fragments. The annular pattern is regular along the trunk and the only modification occurs in the cloacal region. There are 18 to 20 dorsal and 21 to '22 ventral segments to a midbody annulus, with considerable irregularity even between adjacent segments. There is a row of 12 small, but clearly marked, round precloacal pores in the male holotype and in the unsexed DZ specimen. Eight to ten segments form the shallow, segment-shaped precloacal shield, and 14 to 18 small postcloacals fringe the posterior edge. There are four lateral and six caudal annuli up to and including the markedly narrowed autotomy annulus. Caudal annuli number 26 to 27, the last three indicated only by very shallow raphes and represented as inscribed markings on the bluntly ridged caudal tip. Most of the dorsal and lateral segments on the tip appear faintly convex. The tail is bluntly oval at its base, swells laterally beyond the autotomy constriction, and then shows some faint lateral compression toward the distal tip. The lateral sulci are clearly marked after the 45th body annulus; at midbody they are about as wide as a fringing segment and filled with several kinds o'f irregular segments. Dorsal and ventral sulci are poorly indicated by alignment of intersegmental raphes. The middorsal segments are approximately 1.5 times as long as wide, the midventral segments about 1.4 times as wide as long, with some segment variability along the trunk (Gans 1965).
Amphisbaena lumbricalis	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	DIAGNOSIS: Very slender. Preanal pores cicatricial, usually 4, rarely 2, 5 or 6. Body annuli 225-247, tail annuli 20-26. Autotomy level not apparent in the intact tail, breaks on annuli 6-10. Segments to a midbody annulus 12-16/16-20. No major fusions of head scales. Prefrontals the largest scales on top of the head. Parietals veiy variable, irregular. Three upper and three lower labials, in both cases the second by far the largest. (Vanzolini 1996)DESCRIPTION: (Figures 1-3) A small form, maximum rostro-anal length (72 specimens) 156 mm. Head slightly arcuate in profile, snout rounded in dorsal view. Tail relatively short, cylindrical proximally, becoming progressively a little thinner on the distal two thirds; terminal cap slightly acuminate, little incised. Autotomy level not noticeable on the intact tail, broken tails (19 specimens) with 5-9 annuli remaining. Median dorsal sutures of the head in the following order of decreasing length: prefrontal, frontal, nasal. Prefrontals very large. Frontals forming together a rough diamond, with the front edges tending to a bow-like curve. Parietal series varying from a proper transverse row, with two larger polygonal scales on the center, to an irregular series, with diverse divisions and fusions, the latter occasionally extensive. Nasal scale large, the nostril near the front edge, a little below the middle. Three upper labials, the second by far the largest, the third high, narrowly meeting or missing the postocular. Ocular diamond-shaped; the eye, sitting on the front half, varies from invisible to a very definite black spot. Postocular large, polygonal, meeting above the frontal and the parietal series. Below the postocular a short vertical row of two scales, the lower one in a post-labial position, corresponding to the post-genial row ventrally. Symphysial moderate, a little wider in front. Three lower labials, the second by far the largest. Postsymphysial large, seven- or eight-sided. Lateral geniais (nomenclature as in Vanzolini, 1991) moderate. Anterior medial genials two, fairly regular, embracing from behind the postsymphysial. Second row of medial genials with three irregular elements. Postgenials four or five on each side, with diverse types of fusions. On the body no ventral or dorsal sulci; lateral sulci always present, though varying in degree of expression. Pores little marked, not definite and rounded, but scar-like, hard to see. Of 72 specimens, 67 with 4 pores, 1 with 2, 2 with 5 and 2 with 6. Preanal flap semicircular, with 8 scales. Dorsal parts reddish brown, head a little lighter. Edges of segments very slightly lighter than the center, without, however, taking a reticulate appearance. Below the lateral sulci the borders of the segments become progressively lighter, resulting in 5-6 rows of light segments with a dark center. Ventral parts of the body immaculate, waxy yellow to light cream. Underside of tail with a variable area of light segments with dark spots on the Middle (Vanzolini 1996)
Amphisbaena munoai	Sauria	Amphisbaenidae	Diagnosis: Amphisbaena munoai distinguishes from other species of Amphisbaena by the following combination of characters: (1) rounded head; (2) smooth segments on the tip of the tail; (3) four precloacal pores; (4) 202-218 body annuli; (5) row of postmalar shields present; (6) 18-25 caudal annuli; (7) caudal autotomy visible between 5 and 9 tail annuli; (8) 10-14 segments on the midbody annulus (from Perez & Borges-Martins 2019: 135).Comparison: Amphisbaena munoai is distinguished from A. albocingulata by presenting the post-malar row (vs. post-malar row absent). Differs from A. hogei by presenting 202-218 body annuli (vs. 177-191 body annuli). It differs from A. heterozonata by presenting 18-23 caudal annuli (vs. 13-17 caudal annuli). It differs from A. nigricauda by presenting a uniform coloration in the tip of the tail (vs. a darker coloration in the tip of the tail). It differs from A. trachura by presenting smooth scales in the tip of the tail (vs. tuberculate s
Boa constrictor	Serpentes	Boidae	Diagnosis (constrictor in Honduras): “Boa constrictor differs from all other Honduran snakes by the combination of having enlarged ventral scales that do not extend the entire width of the venter, no enlarged scales on the top of the head, mostly entire subcaudal scales, smooth dorsal scales in more than 60 rows at midbody, a huge adult size, and in lacking labial pits.” (McCranie 2011: 61)Detailed description (constrictor): McCranie 2011: 62Diagnosis (longicauda)”: Boa constrictor longicauda may be distinguished from all conspecifics by the much longer tail (in the male) and hemipenis. Additionally, it may be distinguished from B. c. imperator by fewer dorsal body bloches (20-21 in longicauda, 22 or more in imperator), the longitudinal mid-dorsal band without projections to the eyes, and the generally darker head and body coloration, without tan or red color on the tail in adults; from B. c. constrictor by lack of red coloration on the tail, fewer midbody scale rows (a maximum of 76, usually fewer in longicauda, a minimum of 81, usually several more in constrictor), the darker body pattern without tan color, and the grey, black-spotted head in adults; from B. c. ortonii by the much darker overall coloration, lack of red tail color and lower ventral count (246-252 in ortonii); from B. c. melanogaster (sensu Langhammer, 1983) by the much longer tail, lack of melanistic ventral coloration, and fewer middorsal scale rows (86 or more in melanogaster); from B. c. amarali by the overall darker coloration, greater number of subcaudals (43-52 in amarali), and fewer dorsal body saddles (22 or more in amarali); and from B. c. occidentalis by the greater number of subcaudals (45-46 in occidentalis), and the very different color patterns (a blackish network or reticulum on a cream ground color in occidentalis) [from Price & Russo 1991].Diagnosis (orophias): A Constrictor with a prominent snout and a convex canthus; 65 to 75 dorsal scale rows at midbody, 270 to 288 ventrals, and 27 to 31 distinct, subrectangular, dark dorsal saddles to the level of the anus; dorsal ground color rich brown; venter white with black or grey spotting pronounced; subocular stripe distinct and complete; loreal stripe largely obsolete; dark pigment on chin and infralabials not closely corresponding to the facial stripes [Lazell 1964: 261].
Eunectes beniensis	Serpentes	Boidae	Identification. The meristic data and description from accounts by Dirksen (2002) and Dirksen and Böhme (2005) for E. beniensis are augmented with additional information based on our examination of the newly collected specimens. Eunectes beniensis is characterized by having 36–39/48–51/30–33 dorsal scales (unkeeled, with no apical pits), 219–230 narrow ventral scales, 54–59 subcaudal scales, undivided cloacal scale, one loreal scale, one preocular scale, three postocular scales, two or three subocular scales in contact with supralabials (Fig. 2), 14 or 15 supralabial scales, 17–19 infralabial scales, temporal scales numerous and variable, and chin-shields not present. See Table 1 for comparison of meristic data of new specimens. (Powell et al. 2023)Color, pattern, and description: stout-bodied with head large and slightly differentiated from neck. Dorsum ground color olive-brown with 87–126 large, dorsal, black blotches, separated by three or four scales with smaller, solid, roundish or irregularly shaped, black blotches throughout flank region. Head color same as dorsum, with five distinct, black, longitudinal stripes, two or three scales wide (Fig. 3), one median dorsal, one pair of dorsolateral, and one pair of lateral stripes; lateral stripe starting from posterior eye to slightly past mouth. Eyes medium-sized, slightly dorsal, with elliptical pupil and brown to bronze iris. Ventral color yellow, with numerous black irregular marks throughout and sometimes forming interrupted longitudinal shapes. (Powell et al. 2023)
Ornithuroscincus nototaenia	Sauria	Scincidae	Description: Snout short, obtuse; lower eyelid scaly; ear-opening oval, smaller than the eye-opening, no lobules. Nostril in the nasal; no supranasals; frontonasal more broad than long, in contact with the rostral and with the frontal; latter as long as frontoparietals and interparietal together, in contact with the two anterior supraoculars; four supraoculars; eight supraciliaries; fronto- parietals and interparietal equal; parietals in contact; a pair of temporals and three pair of nuchals; fifth upper labial below the eye. Body with 24 smooth scales round the middle, the two vertebral series enlarged, more than twice as broad as long; the distance between the tip of the snout and the fore limb is contained one time and a half in that between axilla and groin; praeanals enlarged. Tail thick, about one time and one third the length of head and body. Limbs short, overlapping when adpressed; digits short, compressed, fourth toe with 18 smooth lamellae below (de Rooij 1915: 181).Coloration: Reddish-brown above, with a broad blackish-brown vertebral streak, sometimes broken up into spots; a light dorso-lateral streak, edged below with blackish; flanks, sides of head, and limbs blackish-brown, dotted with white; tail reddish-brown with a series of dark spots on each side, the spots separated by light vertical lines. Lower parts brownish-white,tail spotted with brown (de Rooij 1915: 181).Size: Length of head and body 48 mm; tail (reproduced) 62 mm (de Rooij 1915: 181).
Ungaliophis continentalis	Serpentes	Boidae	Definition (genus). “(Modified from Bogert, 1968a) Relatively small tropidopheids (760 mm TL.) with the head distinct from neck, relatively slender and compressed body and a short, prehensile tail (8.5-12.4% of TL). Males have well-developed anal spurs; these may be present, although not as well developed, in some females. The eye is moderate in size (its diameter is greater than its distance to the lip) with a vertically elliptical pupil. The anterior dorsal cephalic scales are relatively large, especially the frontal and the single prefrontal. The parietals are practically indistinguishable from the dorsals. There are two nasals (with nostril in anterior nasal), one loreal and one preocular, and 2-3 postoculars. Supralabials number 8-10 (two or three reaching the eye), and infralabials 9-11, the first pair of the latter in broad contact behind the moderately large mental, followed posteriorly by 2-3 pairs of chin shields. Tubercles are present on all cephalic scales. The dorsal scales are smooth (except for minute tubercles), in 19-25 rows at midbody, reducing to 17 or 15 near the vent. Ventral scales range from 204 to 258. Subcaudals are single, numbering 39-46. The anal plate is also single, and the tail ends in a blunt spine. The premaxilla is toothless and has an ascending process. The maxillae have 12-15 teeth, the first 4-5 larger and separated from the posterior ones by a short a diastema, all decreasing in size posteriorly. The palatine has 5-8, the pterygoid 11-15, and the dentary 13-15 teeth. The hemipenes are relatively long and bilobed. The sulcus spermaticus appears to bifurcate near the base, and each branch of the sulcus extends to the terminus of the lobe. The basal portion is plicate and calyces on the lobes lack crenate edges.” (Villa & Wilson 1990) Diagnosis (genus). “These small, slender-bodied boas differ from all other Tropidopheidae by having a relatively enormous, azygous prefrontal, and 19-25 rows of dorsal scales at midbody.” (Villa & Wilson 1990)Diagnosis (continentalis). A species of Ungaliophis with 25 rows of scales at midbody, reducing to 15at the vent. Color is grayish brown with dark oval vertebral and paravertebral blotches. The venter is heavily stippled with black. The rostral is in broad contact with the prefrontal, separating the small internasals. The prefrontal and frontal are subequal in size, or the prefrontal somewhat larger. Supraoculars are small, less than half the area of the frontal.There are 9-10 supralabials, two entering the orbit; 2 postoculars; and 14 maxillary teeth. (Villa & Wilson 1990)Alternative description: McCranie 2011: 72
Ungaliophis panamensis	Serpentes	Boidae	Diagnosis: A species of Ungaliophis with 19-23 (rarely 25) rows of scales at midbody, reducing to 17 at the vent. Color is brown with dark diamond- or hourglass-shaped vertebral and triangular paravertebral blotches. The venter is heavily pigmented with prominent ovoid blotches running across the ventrals at least on the posterior half of the body. The rostral is separated from the prefrontal by the internasals. The prefrontal is considerably larger than the frontal. Supraoculars are relatively large, larger than half the area of the frontal. There are 7-9 supralabials, two or three entering the orbit, and 2-3 postoculars. There are 13-15 maxillary teeth. (Villa & Wilson 1990)
Bitis atropos	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (unicolor): Head scaling somewhat similar to that in typical atropos, but less strongly keeled and, over back of head, not so markedly elongate; outermost row of scales on body practically smooth anteriorly and but feebly keeled posteriorly; almost uniformly khaki to reddish brown above and apparently a smaller snake than typical atropos.
Bitis rubida	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “Bitis rubida is characterized by lacking, or having greatly reduced, elongate scales (*horns') in the supraorbital region, and by having a drab, usually reddish, dorsal colouration. It can be distinguished from other small Bits by various scutellation features. It differs from B. xeropaga in having fewer ASR than MSR (ASR equal to or greater in number than MSR in B. xeropaga; Haacke 1975), and lower ventral scale counts in both sexes (B. xeropaga males 147-154, mean 151.5; females 151-155, mean 152.4; Haacke 1975). It differs from B. atropos in having a raised supraorbital ridge. It differs from sympatric and southern populations of Bitis cornuta in having lower ventral scale counts in both sexes, fewer circumorbitals, and usually 29 MSR. Bitis cornuta usually has 27 MSR and a slightly higher number of dorsal blotches. It also differs from B. rubida in always having prominent supraorbital a 'horns' and usually a contrasting colour pattern of grey, white and black (
Montatheris hindii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): “All dorsal head shields small and keeled; rostral horizontally divided, the suprarostral separated from the nasals by 'nasorostrals' (or lateral suprarostrals: Figure Ib); regular duplication of transverse dorsal scale rows, which have distinctive microornamentation consisting of numerous elongate erect lamellae (Figure 2b); subcaudals paired. Vomerine process of premaxilla much reduced (Figure 4b); palatine-pterygoid articulation a simple overlapping joint; intra-pulmonary bronchus short. Hemipenis with extensive naked zones, relatively short spines and no terminal awn or basal hooks.” (Broadley 1996)Generic description: “Skull ectopterygoid without a lateral flange or anterior process; postorbital bone long and narrow; splenial absent, angular present. Head elongate, depressed, covered with small elongate keeled scales, only slightly distinct from the neck; snout short, rounded and with well-marked canthus rostralis; rostral hexagonal, three times as broad as deep, surmounted by a large hexagonal suprarostral which is separated from the nasal by large "nasorostrals"; eye moderate, its vertical diameter slightly less than its distance from the lip; 11-13 circumocular scales; nostril large, directed laterally, pierced in an entire nasal; intemasals 4-5; supralabials 8-9; infralabials 8-10; a small triangular mental is wel1 separated from the first of two pairs of sublinguals by a median suJcus of the first infralabials; interocunasals 2-3; interorbitals 9. Dorsal scales in 25-28 rows at midbody, strongly keeled and imbricate, with reguJar duplications of lateral rows, the outer row enlarged and weakly keeled. Ventrals 130-138; anal entire; subcaudals smooth in 27-36 pairs. Hemipenis with a naked zone on the medial face of each lobe, extending from the fork of the organ to the apical region, where there is a short calyculate zone, the rest of each lobe is covered with relatively short spines, beginning proximal to the sulcus fork and, unusually for viperids, reaching maximum length halfway up each lobe. There is no terminal awn or basal hooks.” (Broadley 1996)
Mixcoatlus melanurus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: Müller 1924: 92Diagnosis (garciai). Subcaudal scales entire; a vertical horn-like scale, with an inner groove, over eye; scales in 21 rows; ventrals 146; subcaudals 40; supralabials 10 to 12, none entering pit. (Smith 1940: 62)Description of holotype (garciai). Head nearly three times as broad as neck; snout rounded, seen from above, slightly projecting in profile; rostral about twice as broad as high, projecting very slightly above edge of upper head scales; four convex internasals bordering rostral, the two median much smaller than the one on either side; nasal divided, the anterior section about twice as large as posterior, in contact with first supralabial; three scales forming inner edge of pit; two rows of small scales between pit and labials; one or two scales between pit and nasal; three rows between pit and eye; three or four rows between eye and labial; four canthals; median supra-ocular produced vertically as a broad "horn" three mm. high, 2.2 mm. long, and about a millimeter wide; horn with a deep vertical groove on inner surface and two or three shallow grooves on outer surface, radiating from base; scale preceding this somewhat larger than scales in frontal region, its posterior edge produced slightly upward against anterior edge of the horn; eleven rows of scales between horns; scales on sides of head not keeled, those on lower temporal region quite smooth and flat, others convex; lower temporal scales somewhat larger than or nearly the same size as posterior supralabial; dorsal head scales small, those posterior to frontal region heavily keeled and with small ridges radiating from the median keel of each scale; anterior dorsal head scales not keeled their full length, but with a prominent posterior knob; supralabials and infralabials eleven. Mental with a labial border somewhat greater than that of rostral; scales of first pair of infralabials in contact behind mental; one pair of chinshields, not much longer than broad; three labials in contact with chinshield; five pairs of small scales following chinshield, then one small median scale; all ventral scales smooth, flat. Dorsals in 23-21-17 rows, those of outer row not keeled, those of second row very weakly keeled, others rather strongly keeled; ventrals 146; anal entire; subcaudals 40, all entire. (Smith 1940: 62)Color. General ground color light tan, very slightly suffused with pink, rather heavily stippled with dark brown; a series of diagonal brown blotches, sometimes dark-edged anteriorly, down middle of back; blotches extending over six to eight rows of scales transversely, about three longitudinally; they are connected diagonally by narrower extensions of the same color about one and one-half to two scales wide, so that the general effect is a zigzag line down the back; small dark blotches, arranged in two rows, very dimly evident on the sides; a light postocular stripe, one and one-half to two scales broad, not sharply defined, extends from eye through temporal region onto anterior part of neck, there disappearing; below this a somewhat narrower dark brown stripe which involves the upper half of the posterior supraocular and disappears on side of neck; supralabials light except anterior scales; a dim, somewhat star-shaped light mark on occiput; upper surface of head otherwise dark brown. Infralabials, except anterior ones, pinkish cream, stippled with dark brown, and with a few well-defined small, very dark spots irregularly arranged; another dark spot, larger but not so well defined, on posterolateral gular region. Mental and anterior infralabials gray, heavily pigmented; other ventral head shields with scattered pigment. Belly and ventral surface of tail heavily pigmented, more posteriorly than anteriorly, with scattered light areas. Dorsal surface of tail nearly uniform dark brown, nearly black, the color extending onto ends of subcaudals; a brilliant white line extending from base of tail along second scale row to tip of tail, descending posteriorly until it lies upon the lateral edges of the subcaudals; a narrow, transverse white band across base of tail near anus. (Smith 1940: 62)Variation (garciai). In ventral and caudal counts the series is amazingly uniform. All have 146 ventrals, and the two with complete tails have 40 caudale (both males). In the two paratypes (U. S. National Museum and E.H.T.-H.M.S. respectively) the scale rows are 25-21-17, 23-21-17; supralabials 12-14, 10-11; infralabials 11-11, 11-12; scales between "horns" 13, 10; total length 407 mm., 449 mm.; tail 55 mm., 51 mm. The dorsal pattern of the female is obscure.  (Smith 1940: 62)Comparisons (garciai). The species is somewhat similar to Trimeresurus undulatus, but differs markedly in having entire instead of divided subcaudals, as well as in other less obvious characters. There seems to be no other described species similar to it. (Smith 1940: 62)
Ophryacus undulatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Definition and diagnosis: Rostral broader than high, moderately to distinctly concave; three preoculars, upper largest and undivided, middle not fused with supralacunal, lower small, somewhat excluded from margin of orbit; three to four supraoculars along dorsal margin of eye including supraocular spine; ten to 13 supralabials; lip margin not scalloped; nine to 14 infralabials; single scale above eye forming long, relatively slender spine, slightly compressed to sub- circular in cross section, not occupying most of dorsal margin of orbit, tip pointed; adjacent scales along dorsal ocular margin often also modified, projecting slightly; canthals and internasals often raised into short spines or with especially high keels; scales in the supraocular region small and keeled; ten to 20 (usually 12–18) intersupraoculars; top of head covered with small scales, most having tubercular keels; second supralabial usually separated from prelacunal by single small subfoveal; subocular and supralabial series separated by two to four rows of small, roundish scales; 21 mid-dorsal scale rows; mid- dorsals at midbody not noticeably broad, obtusely rounded; keel generally extending to tip of scale or nearly so, apical pits not apparent; free portion of apex of dorsal scales moderate in extent, barely over- lapping contiguous scale; interstitial epidermal fold at cranial end of scale well developed; 157–178 ventrals; 37–57 subcaudals, divided; tail spine straight, about as long as preceding two to three subcaudals, pointed or obtusely rounded.Frontal bones with concave dorsal surface, strongly elevated margins, moderately longer than wide; post- frontals moderate in size, not contacting frontal, comprising about equal amount of dorsal perimeter of orbit as parietals; posterolateral edges of dorsal surface of parietals forming distinct flat shelf continu- ing onto parietal as a raised ridge; junction between parietal and pro-otic irregular, not particularly angular; anterior portion of ectopterygoid possessing a shallow depression on medial side accommodating attachment of ectopterygoid retractor muscle; ectop- terygoid noticeably longer than expanded, flattened base of pterygoid (posterior to articulation with ectop- terygoid) with flat shaft tapering posteriorly; apex of choanal process positioned at about midlength on palatine, process moderately reduced in height, apex broadly rounded; dorsal surface of parietal roughly triangular; zero to one (usually zero) palatine teeth, seven to ten pterygoid teeth, seven to nine dentary teeth; pterygoid teeth extending to level of articula- tion of pterygoid with ectopterygoid; maxillary fang relatively short, only slightly longer than height of maxilla; fang at rest extending to level of suture between supralabials 7 and 8; splenial and angular bones fused; haemapophyses in contact distally.Dorsum with zig-zag pattern; ground colour olive- brown, green, or grey, sometimes orange or yellow pigment present; dorsal scales usually finely mottled or speckled with black [from JADIN et al. 2011].
Python anchietae	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: The dorsum of the head is the same color as the body. Two stripes, a yellow one with a black one beneath it, run along the sides of the head on each side from the nostril through the eye to the neck. The upper and lower labials are pale. The venter is whitish. The nasal may be single or divided. There are 4-5 preoculars, 2 or more postoculars, 1or more supraoculars, and 2-3 suboculars. There are 15-18 perioculars and about 10 interoculars. There are 12-15 upper labials, none of which is in contact with the eye. Four or five of the upper labials have sensory pits. There are 15-16 lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 55-61 straight rows. There are 253-267 ventrals and 46-57 divided subcaudals. The cloacal scale may be single or divided (Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 66).
Python curtus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: Top of body is brownish grey, with a series of longitudinal dark, irregular sub-rectangular blotches, sometimes as broad as body; flanks have a longitudinal series of large blotches with black edges; sides of snout have dark stripes; post-ocular pattern comprises black triangular blotches, widening to 4-6 scales at angle of jaws and coalescing with anterior labial blotch of neck; has a pale post-ocular stripe with dark smudges; chin and belly are plain cream or white. Body is short and robust; head is elongate, flat and distinct from neck; vertebral region is ridged; tail is short; cloacal spurs are present (Das 2012: 16).
Python molurus	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis (genus): Diagnosis: Maxillary, palatine and pterygoid bones movable; trans-palatine present; pterygoid extending to quadrate or mandible; supratemporal present, attached scalelike to skull, suspending quadrate. Both jaws with teeth, anterior ones of both jaws elongated and curved; a coronoid present; vestiges of pelvis and legs terminating in a clawlike spur visible on each side of vent. Head with enlarged scales; part of labials bearing pits; scales numerous, in 60-75 scalerows. (Taylor 1965: 664)Description (species): Thick-bodied, smooth-scaled. Head broader than neck; at snout tip and first two upper lip scales have heat sensitive pits. Upper surface eye has vertical pupil. Scale of head has large scales of different shapes and sizes. Yellowish to brown with asymmetrical dark brown, black-edged blotches. Tip of arrow-head mark on head indistinct in adults; tongue and parts of head pale pink. Two dark streaks on side of head, one below, the other through/behind eye. Underside white or yellowish. (Russell's Viper has keeled scales and a pattern similar in color, but with symmetrical blotches that are are either oval with pointed ends, or round. Also, the upper head scales are small). (Whitaker & Captain 2007: 78)Scalation (species): Scales in 60-75 rows, smooth. Ventral 253-270, distinctly narrower than width of belly; anal undivided; subcaudals 58-73, paired. Rostral and first 2 supralabials pitted; supralabials 11-13 (6th or 7th touching eye). (Whitaker & Captain 2007: 78)
Python natalensis	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Diagnosis: P. natalensis can be distinguished from P. sebae in the pattern on the side of the head: in P. natalensis, the dark patch in front of and posterior to the eye is paler and narrower than in P. sebae, giving the appearance of a dark stripe as opposed to a yellow stripe at the level of the eye. The overall coloration of P. natalensis, though similar to P. sebae, is drabber. The scales on the dorsum of the head are small and medium sized in P. natalensis as opposed to medium and large sized in P. sebae, and there are small differences in some of the other head scale counts. The nasal may be single or divided. There are 2-3 preoculars, 3-4 postoculars, 2-3 supraoculars, and a variable number of suboculars. There are 8-13 perioculars and 6-10 interoculars. There are 10-16 upper labials, none of which is in contact with the eye. There are sensory pits on two of the upper labials, as well as smaller ones on three of the lower labials. There are 17-20 lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 76-99 straight rows. There are 260-291 ventrals and 63-84 divided subcaudals. The cloacal scale may be single or divided (Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 67).
Python regius	Serpentes	Pythonidae	Description: The dorsal coloration is dark overall with a pattern of large round or oval yellow spots outlined in black. The dorsum of the head is black. There is a yellow stripe from nostril to eye on each side of the head and two yel- low stripes posterior to the eye. The upper and lower labials are pale. The venter is whitish. The nasal is single. There are 2-4 preoculars, 3-4 postoculars, 1-2 supraocu- lars, and no suboculars. There are 9-12(5) or (5,6) or (6) upper labials. Three or four of the upper labials have sensory pits. There are 15 or so lower labials. The dorsal scales are arranged in 51-63 straight rows. There are 191-207 ventrals and 28-37 divided sub- caudals. The cloacal scale may be single or divided ((Chippaux & Jackson 2019: 69).
Abronia graminea	Sauria	Anguidae	Description: Postmental paired; no protuberant supra-auricular scales; dorsal osteoderms well developed over the entire body; scales of the sides of the neck relatively small; two primary temporals in contact with the orbit; the antepenultimate is the posteriormost supralabial to reach the orbit; anterior canthals lacking; four primary and three or occasionally four secondary temporals; three or four temporal elements in contact with the supralabials; 24 to 30 transverse rows of dorsals; minimum number of scales in any nuchal row usually (75%) four or five, six in 25 percent; caudal whorls 83-94; supranasals present, unexpanded; parietal separated from the medial supraoculars; adults a nearly uniform gray-green or grayish blue (in alcohol) above (Tihen 1954: 20).
Abronia matudai	Sauria	Anguidae	Diagnosis: “A species of Abronia having: (1) supra-auricular scales of adults and subadults protuberant, but not spinelike; (2) supranasals large and often expanded, extending partially across the top of the snout, but not contacting each other at the dorsal midline; (3) a relatively large frontonasal scale, not contacting frontal; (4) posterior internasals relatively small, nearly the same size as the anterior internasals (except on one side of the holotype); (5) discrete canthals; (6) usually two anterior temporals per side, occasionally three or four; (7) parietal contacting median supraoculars; (8) a single occipital scale; (9) posterolateral head scales not knoblike; (10) anterior superciliary contacting cantholoreal, longer than other scales in series; (11) the posterior subocular separated from the lower primary temporal by the antepenultimate or occasionally the penultimate supralabial, the posteriormost scale in this series to reach the orbit; (12) two rows of subimbricate to granular preauricular scales; (13) postmental single or divided; (14) posteriormost infralabial not elongate; (15) six longitudinal nuchal scale rows; (16) 33-37 dorsal transverse scale rows; (17) 14-16 dorsal longitudinal scale rows, arranged parallel to ventrolateral fold; (18) 12-14 ventral longitudinal scale rows; (19) adult males green, females brown; (20) juvenile pattern unknown. This species differs from all species of Abronia east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, except A. ornelasi, A. bogerti, A. montecristoi, and A. salvadorensis, in lacking distinctive spinelike supra-auriculars, although adults have relatively short but protuberant supraauricular scales. Abronia matudai differs from all Nuclear Central American species, except A. fimbriata, A. bogerti, and some individuals of A. aurita, in having the parietal contact the median supraoculars. Abronia matudai differs from A. ornelasi in having supranasals that do not contact each other at the dorsal midline and in having a frontonasal that does not contact the frontal; from A. montecristoi and A. salvadorensis in having more (33-37 versus 28 and 31-32 respectively) dorsal transverse scale rows; from A. fimbriata in having supranasals that do not meet at the dorsal midline and in having a frontonasal; from A. bogerti in usually having a minimum of six (versus eight) nuchals across the nape and 33-37 (versus 40) dorsal transverse scale rows; and from A. aurita in having more dorsal transverse scale rows (33-37 versus 27-31) and in lacking distinctive spinelike supraauricular scales.” (Campbell & Frost 1993: 38)Variation: Campbell & Frost 1993: 38
Oligosoma repens	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Oligosoma repens can be distinguished from other related Oligosoma species through a combination of characters (Figure 4 in  CHAPPLE et al. 2011). Compared to O. maccanni, O. repens has a glossy appearance, with brown predomi- nating whereas O. maccanni has a greyer ground colour. Oligosoma maccanni has a pale grey ventral colour rather than the bright yellow ventral colour in O. repens. The ear opening in O. maccanni often has large projecting scales on the interior margin, whereas these are often minimal or lacking altogether in O. repens. Oligosoma maccanni has four supraocular scales compared with three in O. repens. Oligosoma polychroma from nearby areas have very similar colour patterns to O. repens, but can be distinguished by a pale dorsal stripe on the outside of the forelimbs, and a greyish-brown ventral colouration. The ear opening in O. polychroma often has prominent projecting scales on the interior margin. There are statistical differences between O. repens and O. toka (SVL/HL, SVL/HLL, ventral scales), O. burganae (AG/SF, SE/EF, HL/HW, SVL/HL), and O. notosaurus (SVL/HL, ventral scales) (Figure 4). All O. repens have three supraoculars whereas all O. inconspicuum and O. notosaurus have four. The number of subdigital lamellae in O. tekakahu (16) is fewer than O. repens (19–23). The dorsal surface of the head is usually unmarked in O. repens, in contrast with O. toka and O. notosaurus in particular. The species is more gracile than the other members of the species complex [from  CHAPPLE et al. 2011].
Dendrelaphis andamanensis	Serpentes	Colubridae	Diagnosis: A species of Dendrelaphis, characterized by the combination of (1) vertebral scales strongly enlarged, larger than the dorsals of the first row; (2) 176–196 ventrals; (3) 125– 146 divided subcaudals; (4) 15 dorsal scale rows at midbody; (5) anal shield divided; (6) one loreal scale; (7) two supralabials touching the eye; (8) a short first sublabial that usually touches two infralabials (five infralabials on one side in one specimen); (9) 11–16 temporal scales; (10) two to three postoculars; (11) maximum total length 120.0 cm; (12) Rel TAIL 0.30–0.34; (13) a narrow temporal stripe that starts before the eye, covers only the lower edge of the temporal region and does not extend onto the neck; (14) the absence of a light ventrolateral stripe; (15) a bright grass-green coloration in living specimens (Fig. 5) as opposed to the brown/blue coloration in D. cyanochloris.Characters (Andaman islands): Chandramouli 2022
Dendrelaphis ashoki	Serpentes	Colubridae	Diagnosis: A species of Dendrelaphis, characterized by the combination of (1) vertebral scales enlarged, smaller than or equal to the dorsals of the first row; (2) 164–180 ventrals; (3) 151–162 divided subcaudals; (4) 15 dorsal scale rows at midbody; (5) anal shield divided; (6) one loreal scale; (7) two to four supralabials touching the eye; (8) a long first sublabial that touches three to five infralabials; (9) 9–14 temporal scales; (10) two postoculars; (11) maximum total length 102.5 cm; (12) Rel TAIL 0.37–0.40; (13) a black temporal stripe that starts on the postnasal or loreal, covers the majority of the temporal region and extends onto the neck; (14) a faint, light ventrolateral stripe not bordered by black lines.
Liolaemus vulcanus	Sauria	Liolaemidae	Diagnosis: Liolaemus vulcanus belongs to the L. montanus series (Schulte et al., 2000) because it has a blade- like process in tibia (Etheridge, 1995), associated to a greatly hypertrophied M. tibialis anticus (Abdala et al., 2006). It differs from all the members of the L. boulengeri group due to the lack of a enlarged patch of scales on the posterior thighs (Etheridge, 1995; Abdala, 2007). Compared to the species of the montanus groups that lack the enlarged patch of scales, Liolaemus vulcanus is a robust lizard (Max SVL = 97 mm) differing from L. andinus Koslowsky, L. audituvelatus, L. disjunctus, L. eleodori Cei, Etheridge, & Videla, L. erroneus, L. etheridgei Lau- rent, L. fabiani, L. famatinae Cei, L. fittkaui Laurent, L. griseus Laurent, L. huacahuasicus Laurent, L. insolitus, L. islugensis Ortiz & Marquet, L. molinai, L. montanus Koslowsky, L. multicolor Kowslowsky, L. orko Abdala & Quinteros, L. ortizi, L. pantherinus, L. poconchilensis, L. poecilochromus Laurent, L. pulcherrimus Laurent, L. reichei Werner, L. rosenmanni, L. ruibali Donoso Barros, L. signifer Duméril & Bibron and L. vallecurensis Pereyra which are smaller (SVL between 50–76 mm). Liolaemus vulcanus shows laminar, sub-imbricated, and smooth or slightly keeled dorsal scales; it differentiates from L. andinus, L. audituvelatus, L. cazianiae Lobo, Slodki & Valdecantos, L. erguetae, L. erroneus, L. forsteri Laurent, L. halonastes Lobo, Slodki & Valdecantos, L. insolitus, L. islugensis, L.molinai, L. patriciaiturrae, L. poecilochromus L. robertoi, L. rosenmanni, and L. schmidti Marx which have juxtaposed and smooth dorsal scales. The dorsal scales differentiate the new species from L. aymararum, L. disjunctus, L. dorbignyi Koslowsky, L. etheridgei, L. fittkaui, L. huacahuasicus, L. huayra Abdala, Quinteros & Espinoza, L. montanus, L. orko, L. ortizi, L. polystictus Laurent, L. stolzmanni Steindachner, L. thom- asi, and L. williamsi which exhibit imbricated (but strongly keeled) dorsal scales and from L. chlorostictus Laurent, L. jamesi Boulenger, L. orientalis Müller, L. poconchilensis, L. robustus, L. signifer and L. stolzmanni which have slightly keeled but juxtaposed dorsal scales. The number of scales around midbody in L. vulcanus (50–63) is lower than L. andinus, L. cazianiae, L. disjunctus, L. duellmani, L. erguetae, L. eleodori, L. foxi, L. halonastes, L. inti Abdala, Quinteros & Espinoza, L. islugensis, L. molinai, L. multicolor, L. nigriceps Philipi, L. patriciaiturrae, L. pulcherrimus, L. poecilochromus, L. pleopholis, L. robertoi, L. rosenmanni, L. ruibali, L. signifer and, L. vallecu- rensis (64–110). Females of L. vulcanus exhibit precloacal pores; this character state differs from L. andinus, L. audituvelatus, L. aymararum, L. duellmani, L. fabiani, L. griseus, L. hajeki, L. i. islugensis, L. jamesi, L. melano- gaster, L. polystictus, L. puritamensis Núñez & Fox, L. robertoi, L. rosenmanni, L. ruibali, L. s. signifer, L. stolz- manni, and L. vallecurensis, which lack precloacal pores. The dorsal color pattern without spots, distinguish the new species from L. dorbignyi, L. inti, and L. scrocchii Quinteros, Abdala & Lobo. Liolaemus huayra, L. orientalis, and L. orko exhibit supernumerary pores, absent in L. vulcanus [from QUINTEROS & ABDALA 2011].
Atractus apophis	Serpentes	Colubridae	Diagnosis: Atractus apophis is distin- guished from all congeners by having: (1) 17/ 17/17 smooth dorsal scale rows; (2) two postoculars; (3) moderate loreal; (4) temporals 1 + 2; (5) seven supralabials, third and fourth contacting orbit; (6) seven infralabials, first three contacting chinshields; (7) five maxillary teeth; (8) four gular scale rows; (9) four preventrals; (10) 167 ventrals in the single male; (11) 34 subcaudals; (12) black dorsum with small and nearly indistinct beige dots; (13) black venter with disperse creamish white squared blotches; (14) moderate body size, single male 379 mm SVL; (15) moderate tail lengthinthemale(14.2%SVL);(16)hemipenis slightly bilobed, semicapitate, and semi-calyculate.
Atractus atratus	Serpentes	Colubridae	Diagnosis: Atractus atratus is distin- guished from all congeners by having: (1) 17/ 17/17 smooth dorsal scale rows; (2) two postoculars; (3) moderate loreal; (4) temporals 1 + 2; (5) seven or eight supralabials, generally third and fourth contacting orbit; (6) eight infralabials, first four contacting chinshields; (7) seven or eight maxillary teeth; (8) three or four gular scale rows; (9) three or four preventrals; (10) 150–153 ventrals in females and 140 in the single male; (11) 22–24 subcaudals in females and 29 in the male; (12) dorsum dark brown with transverse cream irregular blotches; (13) venter uniformly brown or dark brown with a few cream flecks; (14) moderate body size, females reaching 502 mm SVL, males 317 mm SVL; (15) moderate tail length in females (10.0– 10.8% SVL) and long (15% SVL) in the single male; (16) hemipenis moderately bilobed, semicapitate, semicalyculate.
Atractus chthonius	Serpentes	Colubridae	Diagnosis: Atractus chthonius is distinguished from all congeners by having: (1) 17/ 17/17 smooth dorsal scale rows; (2) two postoculars; (3) loreal long; (4) temporals 1 + 2; (5) seven supralabials, third and fourth contacting orbit; (6) generally six infralabials, first three contacting chinshields; (7) 9–11 maxillary teeth; (8) four gular scale rows; (9) generally four preventrals; (10) 137–148 ventrals in females, 138–146 in males; (11) 17–25 subcaudals in females, 20–21 in males; (12) dorsum beige usually with a narrow black vertebral and two dorsolateral cream stripes, first dorsal scale rows brown colored contrasting with remaining dorsal series; (13) venter creamish white, usually with brown blotches forming a central stripe along the body; (14) moderate body size, females reaching 455 mm SVL, males 297 mm SVL; (15) moderate tail length in females (9.0–11.8% SVL) and males (9.2–11.7% SVL); (16) hemipenis slightly bilobed, semicapitate, semicalyculate.
Cnemidophorus leucopsammus	Sauria	Teiidae	Diagnosis: A species of the C. lemniscatus species complex distinguished from all conge- ners by the following combination of charac- ters: (1) maximum SVL in males 92 mm; (2) nostril slightly anterior to nasal suture; (3) rostral scale bluntly rounded; (4) frontonasal hexagonal or octagonal, forming somewhat semicircular or slightly angular sutures with nasals; (5) first supraciliary in contact or separated from prefrontal; (6) scales of circumorbital semicircles 4–6 (total of both sides) in contact with supraoculars, extending to anterior portion of fourth or suture between fourth and third supraocular; (7) 25–28 (total of both sides) scales in a single row between supraoculars and supraciliaries; (8) mesoptychials slightly enlarged; (9) ven- trals in 8 longitudinal and 33–35 transverse rows; (10) bisexual (gonochoristic); (11) brachials moderately enlarged and decreasing in size towards shoulder; (12) males with one anal spur at each side; spur moderately to distinctly elongate, extending close to body; (13) 1–2 small scales between anal spur and preanal shield; (14) subcaudals near base of tail smooth; (15) vertebral and paravertebral stripes absent; (16) adult males black with or without a few pale spots on inguinal region; (17) females in life brown dorsally with dark dorsolateral fields and grayish flanks with small whitish spots; (18) juvenile color pattern unknown [from UGUETO & HARVEY 2010].Comparisons: Harvey et al. 2012: 107 (Table 11)
Cnemidophorus rostralis	Sauria	Teiidae	Diagnosis: A species of the C. lemniscatus species complex distinguished from all conge- ners by the following combination of characters: (1) maximum SVL in males 79 mm; (2) nostril usually anterior, less often slightly anterior or centered within nasal suture; (3) rostral scale pointed and projecting; (4) frontonasal hexagonal or octagonal, forming angular or semicircular sutures with nasals; (5) first supraciliary usually separated, less often in contact with prefrontal; (6) scales of circumorbital semicircles 4–8 (total of both sides) in contact with supraoculars, extending to posterior portion of third or, less often, to anterior portion of fourth supraocular; (7) 25– 38 (total of both sides) scales usually in single row, sometimes in partially doubled row between supraoculars and supraciliaries; (8) mesoptychials slightly enlarged; (9) ventrals in eight longitudinal and 30–32 transverse rows; (10) bisexual (gonochoristic); (11) brachials moderately enlarged and extending to, but decreasing in size towards, shoulder; (12) males with one anal spur at each side; spur usually somewhat narrow and moderately elongate, extending close to body; (13) 1–3 small scales between anal spurs and preanal shield; (14) subcaudals near base of tail smooth; (15) vertebral and paravertebral stripes absent; (16) adult males in life jet black, with brownish cast on sides of head and with or without 20–33 faint, almost invisible pale spots on flanks; (17) females in life uniformly gray-brown with or without 21–30 small, very faint pale spots; (18) juvenile color pattern like that of adult females [from UGUETO & HARVEY 2010].Comparisons: Harvey et al. 2012: 107 (Table 11)
Cnemidophorus ruthveni	Sauria	Teiidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Cnemidophorus distinguished from all congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) maximum SVL in males 151 mm (Lammere ́e, 1970); (2) nostril usually slightly anterior to nasal suture; (3) rostral scale bluntly rounded; (4) frontonasal usually hexagonal or octagonal, forming slightly angular sutures with nasals; (5) first supraciliary usually separated from prefrontal; (6) scales of circumorbital semicir- cles 9–12 (total of both sides) in contact with supraoculars, extending to posterior or middle portion of third supraocular; (7) 51–96 (total of both sides) scales in doubled or tripled rows between supraoculars and supraciliaries; (8) mesoptychials barely enlarged; (9) ventrals in 10–12 longitudinal and 35–40 transverse rows; (10) bisexual (gonochoristic); (11) brachials barely enlarged and restricted to small patch near elbow; (12) males with one anal spur on each side; spur broad and short, extending very close to body; (13) 2–3 medium scales between anal spur and preanal shield; (14) subcaudals near base of tail smooth; (15) stripes absent in juveniles, but dark dorsolat- eral fields often indicated on rump; (16) adult males in life with dark gray head with white or pale blue spots and brown or tan body with 12–19 large white or pale blue spots on flanks; (17) females in life uniformly gray-brown with indication of pale lateral longitudinal stripes or 0–15 faint large spots on flanks; (18) juvenile color pattern like that of adult females [from UGUETO & HARVEY 2010].Comparisons: Harvey et al. 2012: 107 (Table 11)
Cyrtodactylus sumuroi	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis: The critical comparisons for this species are congeners from the C. agusanensis complex. Cyrtodactylus sumuroi is distinguished from C. agusanensis by mid- body dorsals 87–98 (vs. 111–124); paraverte- brals 163–180 (vs. 184–196); postcloacal tubercles 4–6 (vs. 8–11); scales separating precloacals and femorals 19–21 (vs. 13–17); caudal annuli with tubercles 3–7 (vs. 7–12); canthal stripe present (vs. absent); anterior– posterior dorsal band projections minimal or absent (vs. extensive); and dark dorsal bands enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed). Cyrtodactylus sumuroi also exhibits tendencies toward fewer subdigital lamellae beneath Finger III (18–22 vs. 21–24), and midbody ventral scales (53–58 vs. 56–68).Cyrtodactylus sumuroi is readily diagnosed from C. gubaot (Leyte) by SVL 73.9–84.9 (vs. 85.6–100.1), paravertebrals 163–180 (vs. 150– 162), ventral color cream (vs. dark gray with white flecks), anterior–posterior dorsal band projections minimal or absent (vs. moderate); dark dorsal bands enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed); cephalic tubercles moderate (vs. large); and number of caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles 3–7 (vs. 9–12). Cyrtodactylus sumuroi also exhibits tenden- cies toward fewer midbody ventrals (53–58 vs. 54–67), midbody dorsals (87–98 vs. 92–105), and subdigital lamellae beneath Finger III (18–22 vs. 20–26) and Toe IV (21–24 vs. 24– 30).From C. mamanwa (Dinagat), C. sumuroi is distinguished by the presence (vs. absence) of a canthal stripe, anterior–posterior dorsal band projections minimal or absent (vs. moderate), cephalic tubercles moderate (vs. small), and caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles 3–7 (vs. 7–12). Cyrtodactylus sumuroi also exhibits tendencies toward fewer midbody dorsals (87–98 vs. 95–112), midbody ventrals (53–58 vs. 57–70), and paravertebrals (163– 180 vs. 173–192).Cyrtodactylus sumuroi is diagnosable from all other Philippine congeners (C. annulatus, C. jambangan, C. tautbatorum, C. redimicu- lus, and C. philippinicus) by characters of body size and scalation (Table 3). The new species can be distinguished from C. jamban- gan and C. tautbatorum by larger SVL and the presence of dark dorsal bands enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed); from C. tautbatorum by a greater number of subdigital lamellae beneath Toe IV; from C. annulatus, C. jambangan, C. tautbatorum, and C. phi- lippinicus by the presence (vs. absence) of femoral pore-bearing scales; from C. tautba- torum and C. redimiculus by a greater number of midbody tubercle rows; from C. redimiculus by fewer paravertebral scales, fewer midbody dorsals, a greater number of dorsal tubercle rows, and larger cephalic tubercles; from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, C. redimiculus, and C. philippinicus by the presence of a canthal stripe (vs. absence); from C. annulatus by the presence of anterior–posterior dorsal band projections (vs. absence); and from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, and C. philippinicus by having fewer caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles (Table 3 in SILER et al. 2010).
Cyrtodactylus gubaot	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis: Cyrtodactylus gubaot most closely resembles congeners from the C. agusanensis complex and is distinguished from C. agusanensis by midbody dorsals 92–105 (vs. 111–124), paravertebrals 150–162 (vs. 184–196), postcloacal lateral tubercles 4–6 (vs. 8–11), venter dark gray with white flecks (vs. cream throughout), the presence (vs. absence) of a canthal stripe, anterior–posterior dorsal band projections moderate (vs. extensive), and cephalic tubercles large (vs. moderate).Cyrtodactylus gubaot is diagnosed from sumuroi (Samar) by SVL 85.6–100.1 mm (vs. 73.9–84.9), paravertebrals 150–162 (vs.163–180), venter dark gray with white flecks (vs. cream throughout), anterior–posterior dorsal band projections moderate (vs. minimal), dark dorsal bands not enclosing light bands (vs. light bands enclosed), cephalic tubercles large (vs. moderate), and caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles 9–12 (vs. 3–7). Cyrtodactylus gubaot also exhibits tendencies toward a greater number of midbody ventrals (54–67 vs. 53– 58), midbody dorsals (92–105 vs. 87–98), and subdigital lamellae beneath Finger III (20–26 vs. 18–22) and Toe IV (24–30 vs. 21–24).Cyrtodactylus gubaot is readily diagnosed from C. mamanwa (Dinagat) by paraverte- brals 150–162 (vs. 173–192), venter dark gray with white flecks (vs. cream throughout), the presence of a canthal stripe (vs. absence), dark dorsal bands not enclosing light bands (vs. light bands enclosed), and cephalic tubercles large (vs. small). Cyrtodactylus gubaot also shows a tendency toward fewer paravertebral tubercles (19–27 vs. 25–31).Cyrtodactylus gubaot is distinguished from all other Philippine congeners by characters of body size and scalation (Table 3). Cyrtodac- tylus gubaot can be distinguished from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, C. jambangan, C. redimiculus, and C. philippinicus by dark gray venter with white flecks, larger cephalic tubercle size, and the presence (vs. absence) of a canthal stripe; from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, C. jambangan, and C. redimicu- lus by a greater number of subdigital lamellae beneath Toe IV; from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, C. jambangan, and C. philippi- nicus by the presence of femoral pore-bearing scales; from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, and C. redimiculus by a greater number of midbody tubercle rows; from C. redimiculus and C. philippinicus by dark dorsal bands enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed); from C. tautbatorum and C. jambangan by larger SVL; from C. annulatus and C. tautbatorum by more postcloacal lateral tubercles; from C. tautbatorum by a greater number of subdigital lamellae beneath Finger III; from C. jambangan by a greater number of caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles; and from C. redimiculus by a greater number of midbody ventrals, fewer paravertebrals, and moderate anterior–posterior dorsal band pro- jections (vs. minimal).
Cyrtodactylus mamanwa	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis: Cyrtodactylus mamanwa is distinguished from C. agusanensis by post- cloacal tubercles 4–7 (vs. 8–11); anterior– posterior dorsal band projections moderate (vs. extensive); dark dorsal band enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed); and cephalic tubercles small (vs. moderate). Cy- rtodactylus mamanwa also shows tendencies toward fewer subdigital lamellae beneath Finger III (18–23 vs. 21–24) and midbody dorsals (95–112 vs. 111–124); and a greater number of scales separating pore-bearing precloacal and femoral scales (15–21 vs. 13– 17).From C. gubaot (Leyte), C. mamanwa is distinguished by paravertebrals 173–192 (vs. 150–162); venter cream (vs. dark gray with white flecks); the absence (vs. presence) of a canthal stripe; dark dorsal bands enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed); and cephalic tubercles small (vs. large). Cyrtodac- tylus mamanwa also shows tendencies toward a greater number of paravertebral tubercles (25–31 vs. 19–27).From C. sumuroi (Samar), C. mamanwa is distinguished by the absence (vs. presence) of a canthal stripe; anterior–posterior dorsal band projections moderate (vs. minimal or absent); cephalic tubercles small (vs. moder- ate); and caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles 7–12 (vs. 3–7). Cyrtodactylus mamanwa also exhibits tendencies toward a greater number of midbody dorsals (95–112 vs. 87–98), mid- body ventrals (57–70 vs. 53–58), and paraver- tebrals (173–192 vs. 163–180).The new species can be readily diagnosed from all other Philippine congeners by char- acters of body size and scalation (Table 3). Cyrtodactylus mamanwa can be distinguished from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, C. jam- bangan, and C. philippinicus by the presence (vs. absence) of femoral pore-bearing scales; it is further distinguished from all these species and C. redimiculus by having a greater number of pore-bearing precloacofemorals; from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, and C. jambangan by having a greater number of midbody dorsals and paravertebrals; from C. annulatus, C. tautbatorum, and C. redimicu- lus by having a greater number of midbody tubercle rows; from C. annulatus and C. tautbatorum by having a greater number of subdigital lamellae beneath Toe IV; from C. tautbatorum and C. jambangan by dark dorsal bands enclosing light bands (vs. light bands not enclosed); from C. tautbatorum by having a greater number of subdigital lamellae beneath Finger III and the absence of a canthal stripe; from C. redimiculus by having a greater number of paravertebral tubercles and pronounced anterior–posterior dorsal band projections; and from C. jambangan by having a greater number of caudal annuli with dorsal tubercles.
Brachymeles kadwa	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles kadwa can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body size large (SVL 90.6–128.2 mm); (2) pentadactyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae five or six; (4) Toe-IV lamellae 7–10; (5) limbs relatively long; (6) paravertebrals 68–70; (7) supralabials seven; (8) infralabials six; (9) pineal eye spot present, small; (10) supranasals in contact; (11) pre- frontals not contacting on midline; (12) enlarged chin shields in two pairs; (13) nuchal scales undifferentiated; (14) fifth and sixth supralabial below eye; (15) auricular opening present; (16) continuous, light dorsolateral stripes present, indistinct; (17) continuous, dark middorsal stripes present; (18) dark lateral stripes present; and (19) dark ventral pigmentation present (Tables 4 and 5 in SILER & BROWN 2010).
Brachymeles tungaoi	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles tungaoi can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body size moderate (SVL 78.2–106.2 mm); (2) relative tail length long; (3) pentadactyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae five or six; (4) Toe-IV lamellae nine or 10; (5) limb length moderate; (6) paraver- tebral scale rows 66–68; (7) supralabials seven; (8) infralabials six; (9) pineal eye spot present, large; (10) supranasals in contact; (11) pre- frontals not contacting on midline; (12) contact between first pair of chin shields; (13) enlarged chin shields in two pairs; (14) nuchal scales undifferentiated; (15) fifth and sixth supralabial below eye; (16) auricular opening present; (17) continuous, light dorso- lateral stripes present, indistinct; (18) contin- uous, dark middorsal stripes present; (19) dark lateral stripes present; and (20) dark ventral pigmentation absent (Tables 4 and 5 in SILER & BROWN 2010).For further comparison see SILER & BROWN 2010.
Brachymeles vindumi	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles vindumi can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body size moderate (SVL 104.9–113.6 mm); (2) penta- dactyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae six; (4) Toe-IV lamellae nine or 10; (5) moderate limb length; (6) midbody scale rows 30 or 31; (7) axilla– groin scale rows 49; (8) paravertebral scale rows 74; (9) supralabials seven; (10) infra- labials six; (11) pineal eye spot present, indistinct; (12) supranasals in contact; (13) prefrontals separate; (14) parietal in contact; (15) enlarged chin shields in two pairs; (16) first pair of chin shields separated; (17) nuchals undifferentiated; (18) fifth and sixth supralabials below the eye; (19) auricular opening present; (20) continuous, light dorso- lateral stripes present, distinct; (21) dark lateral stripes present; and (22) dark ventral pigmentation present (Tables 4 and 5).For further comparison see SILER & BROWN 2010.
Brachymeles boholensis	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles boholensis can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body size moderate (SVL 83.8–93.6 mm); (2) limbs pentadactyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae six; (4) Toe-IV lamellae nine or 10; (5) limb length moderate; (6) supralabials seven; (7) infra- labials seven; (8) pineal eye spot present; (9) supranasals not contacting on midline; (10) prefrontals not contacting on midline; (11) enlarged chin shields in three pairs; (12) nuchal scales undifferentiated; (13) fifth and sixth supralabial below eye; (14) auricular opening present; (15) continuous, light, dorsolateral stripes present; and (16) continuous, dark middorsal stripes present (Tables 4 and 5 in SILER & BROWN 2010).For further comparison see SILER & BROWN 2010.
Brachymeles mindorensis	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles mindorensis can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body size moderate (SVL 90.0–104.2 mm); (2) pentadactyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae five or six; (4) Toe-IV lamellae eight or nine; (5) moderate limb length; (6) supralabials seven; (7) infralabials six; (8) pineal eye spot present; (9) enlarged chin shields in two pairs; (10) nuchal scales undifferentiated; (11) fifth and sixth supralabial below eye; (12) auricular opening present; (13) continuous, light, dorso- lateral stripes present; and (14) continuous, dark middorsal stripes present (Tables 4 and 5 in SILER & BROWN 2010).For further comparison see SILER & BROWN 2010.
Brachymeles taylori	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles taylori can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body size moderate (SVL 65.8–99.2 mm); (2) pentadac- tyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae five or six; (4) Toe- IV lamellae nine or 10; (5) moderate limb length; (6) supralabials six; (7) infralabials seven; (8) pineal eye spot present; (9) supranasals not contacting on midline; (10) prefrontals not contacting on midline; (11) enlarged chin shields in two pairs; (12) nuchal scales undifferentiated; (13) fourth and fifth supralabial below eye; (14) auricular opening present; (15) dorsolateral stripes absent; and (16) continuous, dark middorsal stripes pres- ent (Tables 4 and 5 in SILER & BROWN 2010).For further comparison see SILER & BROWN 2010.
Brachymeles orientalis	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Brachymeles orientalis can be distinguished from congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) body large (SVL 97.6–112.3 mm); (2) pentadactyl; (3) Finger-III lamellae six or seven; (4) Toe-IV lamellae 8–10; (5) limbs relatively long; (6) supralabials six or seven; (7) infralabials six or seven; (8) pineal eye spot present; (9) supranasal contact absent; (10) prefrontals not contacting on midline; (11) enlarged chin shields in two pairs; (12) nuchal scales undifferentiated; (13) fourth and fifth supra- labial below eye; (14) auricular opening present; (15) dorsolateral stripes absent; and (16) middorsal stripes absent (Tables 4 and 5 in SILER & BROWN 2010).For further comparison see SILER & BROWN 2010.
Dibamus dalaiensis	Sauria	Dibamidae	Diagnosis: Dibamus dalaiensis is differentiated from all other congeners by having the following combination of characters: maximum SVL of 127.6 mm; tail length 18–22% of SVL; labial and nasal sutures complete; rostral suture present but incomplete; rostral pad divided into two equal parts; a single postocular; three scales bordering the posterior edge of first infralabial; an enlarged, medial, sublabial scale; 20 midbody scale rows; 22 transverse scale rows just posterior to head; 20 transverse scale rows just anterior to vent; 185–209 ventral scales; 48–52 sub- caudal scales; relative size of frontal to frontanasal 1.4; and relative size of interparietal to surrounding scales 1.5. These characters are scored across all nominal species of Dibamus in Table 2 in NEANG et al. 2011.
Tenuidactylus dadunensis	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis. Cyrtopodion dadunense can be distinguished from all other Cyrtopodion by a combination of the following characters: nostril bordered by rostral, first supralabial, one supranasal, and two subequal postnasals; back tubercles arranged in regular longitudinal rows; 23–26 ventral scales across midabdomen; 97–108 scales along the ventrum of body from postmental to cloaca; 18–22 subdigital lamellae beneath fourth toe; 8–10 precloacal pores in males; caudal tubercles broadly in contact laterally with each other; a single row of transversally enlarged subcaudals; dorsal bands in waving shape, much thinner than interspaces. (Shi & Zhao 2011)Description of holotype. Adult male, SVL = 48.79 mm; TL = 71.15 mm; SVL/TL = 0.69; head moderately long (HL/SVL = 0.28), wide (HW/HL = 0.75), not depressed (HH/HL = 0.69), distinct from neck; eye large, EYD/E–N = 0.75; ear opening small, EAD/EYD = 0.40. Head covered above by almost uniform granular scales; nostril bordered by rostral, first supralabial, one supranasal, and two subequal postnasals; one internasal between supranasals; 11 supralabials, 9 infralabials; 13 interorbitals; 13 scales between eye and ear, 105 scales between postmentals and cloaca; 24 transverse rows of ventrals at midbody; 11 (5 + 6) subdigital lamellae on the first toe; 19 (10 + 9) subdigital lamellae on the fourth toe. Mental scale triangular; two pairs of postmentals, first largest, broadly in contact with each other, suture between them shorter than the mental scale (Fig. 2). Dorsal tubercles trihedral, lateral overlapping with each other or separated from each other only by 1–2 granular scales, 10–12 scales surrounding each dorsal tubercle. Dorsal trihedral tubercles regularly arranged, roughly in 12 transverse and 22 paravertebral rows (Fig. 3A). Upper arm with imbricate scales in longitudinal rows, those on forearm heterogeneous interspersed with tubercular scales. Thigh and tibia with slightly imbricate scales interspersed with few tubercles. Tail thin, regularly attenuate, verticillate, the posterior row of each ring covered with larger subtrapezoidal broadly in contact laterally with each other (Fig. 3B); lower surface of the tail, except near the base, with a row of large plates. Postcloacal bulges distinct. A pair of lateral cloacal tubercles present at the base of the tail on each side. Nine precloacal pores (Fig. 4). Dorsum of the new species is light brown, with dark dorsal bands; 1 on occipital area, 1 on nape, 5 on body, and 12 on tail. Dorsal bands in waving shape, much thinner than interspaces. (Shi & Zhao 2011)Variation. The type series consists of eight males, five females and seven juveniles. Males differ from females in having precloacal pores. Males with 8–10 distinct precloacal pores; females without distinct pores, but enlarged precloacal scales may be indistinctly pitted. Meristic variation in the type series is presented in Table 1. Medium-sized geckos (SVL of largest adult examined = 53.88 mm); tail longer than body (longest TL = 71.15 mm); SVL/TL (x̅ = 0.74 +/- 0.04); hind limb moderate, extending to axilla, forelimb short, extending to near nostril; body and head somewhat dorsoventrally compressed. Head moderate (HL/SVL, x̅ = 0.29 +/- 0.02, HW/HL, x̅ = 0.73 +/- 0.03, HH/HW, x̅ = 0.59 +/- 0.02; snout equal to or a little longer than distance between eye and ear. Eye large (EYD/E–N, x̅ = 0.75 6 0.08; ear rounded to ovate, small, EAD/EYD, x̅ = 0.40 +/- 0.04. 0–2 internasal between supranasals; 12–13 interorbital scales; 10–13 supralabials, 8–9 infralabials. 23–26 ventral scales across middle of abdomen; 97–108 from postmentals to cloaca. Cloacal spines present, blunt, two per side. Subdigital lamellae well-developed, nearly as broad as digit, proximal part slightly expanded, 10–13 on first toe, 18– 22 on fourth toe. Regenerated tail without segments and lobes, uniformly covered in small, flat scales. Dorsum ground color is light brown, with 5–6 waving-shaped darker brown bands from the neck to the lumbar area, with even darker posterior margins. The tail has 10–13 bands of the same color. (Shi & Zhao 2011)Comparison with Cyrtopodion species from China, Russia, and adjacent regions.—The new species is assigned to the genus Cyrtopodion (subgenus Cyrtopodion Szczerbak and Golubev, 1996 5 agamuroides + scabrum group, Anderson, 1999) on the basis of following characters: no more than 10 pre-cloacal pores in males; shape of dorsal tubercles trihedral; caudal tubercles broadly contact each other on lateral edges. Although many of the morphological characters examined in this study overlap with those known for other southwestern and Central Asian geckos, the new species described herein has dorsal and caudal scale morphologies most similar to C. elongatum (Blanford, 1875) from the Tarim Basin and western Mongolia. Cyrtopodion elongatum has two distinct swollen supranasal scales; back tubercles not arranged in longitudinal rows, but form rather transverse rows; 21–26 subdigital lamellae beneath fourth toe; four to seven precloacal pores; upper part light gray with darker transverse bands on body, with the interspaces equal in width to the bands. The new species is easily separated from C. elongatum by its one supranasal and two subequal postnasals; dorsal tubercles arranged in regular longitudinal rows; 18–22 subdigital lamellae beneath fourth toe; 8–10 precloacal pores; dorsal bands in waving shape, much thinner than interspaces. Among its other congeners, large and trihedral dorsal tubercles distinguish it from C. agamuroides; the single series of subcaudals distinguishes it from C. kachhense; fewer than 26 scales across mid-abdomen distinguishes it from C. agamuroides, C. ingdachi, C. potoharense, and C. watsoni; more than 20 scales across mid-abdomen distinguishes it from C. gastrophole; the thinner tail, elongated limbs, uniformity of tail scales, and increase in the size of scales with precloacal pores distinguish it from C. scabrum, C. kachhense, and C. watsoni; more than eight precloacal pores in males distinguishes it from C. agamuroides, C. gastrophole, C. ingdachi, C. kachhense, C. potoharense, and C. watsoni (Table 2). The absence of femoral pores in males distinguishes it from the subgenus Tenuidactylus Szczerbak and Golubev, 1984 (5 caspium group, Anderson, 1999): C. caspium, C. fedtschenkoi, C. kohsulaimani, C. montiumsalsorum, and C. turcmenicum. Differences in dorsal tubercles (strongly keeled versus smooth) distinguish it from subgenus Mediodactylus Szczerbak and Golubev, 1984 (5 kotschyi group, Anderson, 1999): C. amictopholis, C. heterocercus, C. kotschyi, C. russowi, C. sagittifer, and C. spinicauda. The condition of its caudal tubercles (strongly keeled versus smooth or feebly keeled) and tail segmentation (present versus absent) distinguishes it from Tibeto-Himalayan species group of thin-toed geckos (5 Siwaligekko Khan, 2003 + Altigekko Khan, 2003): C. battalense, C. chitralensis, C. dattanense, C. himalayanus, C. kirmanense, C. mintoni, C. stoliczkai, and C. tibetanus. The dorsal-tubercle condition (strongly keeled versus smooth or feebly keeled) distinguishes it from the sandstone geckos (5 Indogekko Khan, 2003): C. fortmunroi, C. indusoani, C. rhodocaudus, and C. rohtasfortai. (Shi & Zhao 2011)
Hemidactylus lankae	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis (lankae): Deraniyagala (1953) distinguished “lankae” in bearing 13–19 precloacal femoral pores on each side separated by three non-pored scales based on a series of nine specimens vs. 6–14 in the Indian nominate form (Deraniyagala, 1953). The male holotype in the Colombo National Museum described by Deraniyagala (1953) possesses 19/18 pores, which raises doubts if it is allied to H. triedrus, as a review of literature and examination of museum material representing “H. triedrus” from Sri Lanka show that the specimens possess 7–9 pores on each side as seen in the type of H. triedrus (Daudin, 1802; Somaweera & Somaweera, 2009; Batuwita & Pethiyagoda, 2012). It is likely that the type series of H. lankae comprised of multiple species that did not include representatives of H. triedrus as the specimens possess femoral pores >13. Original description in Amarasinghe et al. 2009.
Hemidactylus hunae	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Original description in Amarasinghe et al. 2009.Diagnosis: The following combination of characters distinguishes H. hunae from all other congeners: adult males reaching 125.5 mm SVL, adult females 124 mm SVL; dorsal scalation of small heterogeneous, carinate, granules inter- mixed with large, conical, carinate tubercles that form 14–16 irregularly arranged longitudinal rows at midbody; dorsal and lateral tubercles equal sized; dorsal furrow distinct with wider nontubercular space middorsally; 2 pairs of post- mentals, secondary pair 1/2 of the primary pair; throat scales granular; no spine-like tubercles on nape; ventrals larger than dorsals, smooth, short, circular, with 40–43 rows at midbody; 9–11 supralabials at midorbit position; 26–28 femoral pores on each side separated medially by 7–9 nonpored enlarged scales; scales on posterior thigh granular, not enlarged; lamellae divided, 8 or 9 subdigital lamellae below the first and 11 or 12 below the fourth toe; dorsal scales on tail granular, carinate, juxtaposed; tail segmented with whorls of lateral tubercles, each whorl consisting of eight enlarged, conical, carinate tubercles separated from one another by one to three small scales; each whorl separated from its neighbor by about 8–10 scale rows; subcaudal scales at base bluntly pointed or rounded and enlarged; median row enlarged and broad; 2 postcloacal tubercles (spurs) on each side; body dorsum with a series of dark-edged faded saddles from occiput to tail base (Amarasinghe et al. 2021).Coloration.—After 83 yr in preservative, the holotype of H. hunae has a dorsal pattern of dark brown-edged light saddle-shaped markings on a grayish brown ground color; irregular dark markings on dorsal head; enlarged tubercles within the interrupted edge of saddles dark brown, the rest cream; dark-edged light brown cross stripes on arm, including digits; dark markings on thigh, cross stripes on tibia and digits; first saddle mark on the nape, second, third, and fourth on midbody, fifth on hips; no saddles on the tail, but dark brown cross stripes on each whorl; venter cream, toe pads light or dark brown.The live coloration (based on live specimens, not collected) may vary from site to site (mostly due to camouflage) and also across age groups, sex, and mood, ranging from grayish purples to browns. The vertebral midline bears a series of W-shape stripes from vent to the tail, with stripes becoming more defined toward the tip. Usually the studded effect that is known as saddles evenly spaced  (Amarasinghe et al. 2021).
Hemidactylus parvimaculatus	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis: A member of the H. brookii group, characterized by the combination of presence of smaller subtrihedral tubercles on mid-dorsum, 11–17 (12 in holotype fide DERANIYAGALA, 1953)  precloacal-femoral pores on either side, interrupted by 1-3 pore-less scales; absence of undivided lamellae (after LAJMI et al. 2016; also see BAUER et al. 2010; MAHONY, 2011).
Pantherophis ramspotti	Serpentes	Colubridae	Diagnosis: A relatively large Pantherophis, most similar and closely related to P. vulpinus. P. ramspotti differs in blotch count, distribution, and cyt-b nucleotides. P. ramspotti has an average dorsal body blotch count anterior to the cloaca of 42.8 whereas P. vulpinus has an average of 36.8 dorsal body blotches. P. ramspotti is generally distributed west of the Mississippi River and possesses seven unique nucleotides at positions 121 (T), 191 (G), 284 (C), 679 (A), 689 (G), 707 (C), and 830 (C).
Andinosaura crypta	Sauria	Gymnophthalmidae	Diagnosis (genus Andinosaura) : All unambiguously optimized synapomorphies for this clade are from DNA sequences. Phenotypic synapomorphies are not known. Other characteristics include: (1) head scales usually smooth (slightly rugose in A. vieta and A. stellae); (2) frontoparietal and parietal scales paired; (3) interparietal, frontal and frontonasal scales single; (4) prefrontal scales usually absent (occasionally present in specimens of A. stellae); (5) lower eyelid divided into several scales; (6) loreal scale absent or present; (7) scale organs on labials present; (8) anteriormost supraocular and anteriormost superciliary scales unfused; (9) dorsal surface of the tongue covered in scale-like papillae; (10) nuchal scales smooth in most species (rugose in A. stellae and A. vieta); (11) dorsal body scales rectangular; smooth, keeled (low, rounded keel), striated (shallow furrows) or rugose; (12) ventral body scales smooth (rugose in A. stellae and A. vieta); (13) limbs pentadactyl; digits clawed; (14) femoral pores in males present, in females absent or present; and (15) hemipenial lobes large, distinct from hemipenial body.Andinosaura differs from Riama by having hemipenial lobes large, distinct from hemipenial body. It differs from Oreosaurus by having a narrow band of differentiated granular lateral scales. [SÁNCHEZ-PACHECO et al. 2017].Comparisons: Riama crypta differs principally from Riama hyposticta by an incomplete superciliary series, formed just by the anteriormost superciliary scale (superciliary series complete in R. hyposticta, formed by five or six scales), no nasoloreal suture [= loreal absent] (complete [= loreal present] in R. hyposticta), distinct dorsolateral stripes at least anteriorly (scattered brown spots dorsally without dorsolateral stripes in R. hyposticta), and ventral coloration composed of small cream or brown spots or longitudinal stripes (dark brown with conspicuous transverse white bars and spots). Additionally, both species have distal filiform appendages on the hemipenial lobes.Diagnosis: Riama crypta can be distinguished from R. hyposticta by the following (condition for R. hyposticta in parentheses): frontonasal shorter than frontal (equal to or slightly longer than frontal); nasoloreal suture usually absent [= loreal absent], exceptionally complete (complete [= loreal present]); superciliary series incomplete, formed by just the anteriormost scale (complete, five or six scales); distinct dorsolateral stripe present at least anteriorly (dorsally with scattered brown spots) and ventral coloration composed of small cream or brown spots or longitudinal narrow stripes (dark brown with conspicuous transverse white bars and spots [yellow in life]); maximum SVL in males 69 mm (82 mm).In addition, Riama crypta (characters in parentheses) can be distinguished from Ecuadorian and Peruvian congeners by meristic characters. Riama anatoloros, R. balneator, R. oculata, R. orcesi, R. simotera, R. stigmatoral, R. unicolor, R. vespertina, R. laudahnae, and R. vieta have two or more (one) superciliaries. All known specimens of Riama meleagris and R. petrorum have just the anteriormost superciliary scale. From these species, Riama crypta can be distinguished by the following: R. meleagris has the frontonasal distinctly longer than, or equal to, frontal (shorter than frontal), the dorsal scales smooth (keeled) and two (three) genials; R. petrorum has two (three) genials, and the dorsal scales striated (keeled). Most of the known specimens of Riama cashcaensis, R. labionis, and R. raneyi and some of R. colomaromani have just the anteriormost superciliary scale. From these species, Riama crypta can be distinguished by the following: R. cashcaensis has the frontonasal much longer than frontal (shorter than frontal), and two or three (4–7) lateral scale rows; R. labionis has the supralabial-subocular fusion present (absent), and two (three) supratympanic temporals; R. raneyi has two or three supraoculars, usually three (four) and the frontonasal distinctly longer than to equal to frontal (shorter than frontal); R. colomaromani has two (three) genials and 22–32 (13–18) longitudinal dorsal scale rows; R. vieta has the dorsal scales rugose (keeled), and 8–10 (4–7) femoral pores per hind limb in males.Similarly, Riama crypta can be distinguished from congeners occurring in Colombia, Venezuela, and the island of Trinidad, except Riama inanis, by the following (condition for R. crypta in parentheses): superciliaries two or more (one). Riama inanis has two (three) genials and the differentiated lateral scales absent or with a single, irregular row present (lateral scale rows 4–7).
Candoia superciliosa	Serpentes	Boidae	Diagnosis and definition (based on 62 specimens examined and less than a dozen others in the literature). A member of the Candoia carinata complex, differing from other complexes of the genus in having a broad, flat, slanted, bevel-like, overhung snout, supralabials entering orbit, subcaudals 35 or more, and ventrals less than 203. Unique among all members of the Candoia carinata complex in the combination of presence (Fig. 2) of a distinct postanal white spot (I 00%); absence of keels on the 2nd row of dorsals (100%); presence of a greatly enlarged supraocular on each side (Fig 3), with a minimum oD or fewer scales in a row between those on the two sides (100%); anterior scale rows fewer than 29 (100%); totallength not exceeding 885 mm, seldom reaching 700 mm; temperament retiring, withdrawing, not aggressive under any circumstance; and diet consisting almost excIusively of ectotherms. (Smith et al. 1981)Comparisons. Species other than those ofthe carinata complex have a more or less rounded snout, not flat and overhung, and the supralabials are separated from the orbit; in addition, in Candoia asper the subcaudals are in the tens or twenties, on a very short tail, and in C. bibronii the ventrals are 203 or more.Within the Candoia carinata complex, the distinct postanal white spot, docHe temperament, ectotherm diet and small size are shared only with populations from the South Moluccas (topotypes of C. carinata, see Böhme et al., 1998), and their relatives in Sangihe, Irian Jaya and northern Papua New Guinea, almost invariably with keels on the 2nd scale row at least on neck. In all populations, the enlarged supraoculars are smaller, usually there is a minimum of 4 or more scales in a row between them, and usually 2 or more border the orbit. The anterior scale rows number 29 or more in 94% of the material from the Solomon Islands, 100% of Bougainville material, 82%. from Papua New Guinea, and 79% from Halmahera. Totallengths of900 mm or more, up to 1375 mm, are known from Halmahera, Bougainville and the Solomon Islands, the largest from the latter area. (Smith et al. 1981)Variation. See tables. Exceedingly polymorphie in colour and pattern in life, "with everything from lemon yellow to charcoal occurring, including bright brick red, and with striped, spotted or zigzag patterns, dull to brightly contrasted" (Crombie, pers. comm.). The striped individuals have a unique, irregular dorsolateral white line on each side (Fig. 5); no other species of the carinata complex exhibits that variation in the striped phase. (Smith et al. 1981)Diagnosis (crombiei): A subspecies of Candoia superciliosa differing primarily from the nominotypical subspecies by having more than 180 ventrals (183-192, M = 188.0, n 8), vs fewer than 180 (165-178, M = 173.4, n 53). See Comparisons for other differences.Description of holotype (crombiei): Smith et al. 1981: 291Comparisons (crombiei): Smith et al. 1981: 292Original description: Günther 1863: 360
Plagiopholis blakewayi	Serpentes	Colubridae	Description (genus): “Maxillary short, extending fowards but slightly beyond the palatine, with 16 small equal teeth; mandibular teeth equal. Head small, not distinct from neck; eye rather small, with round pupil no loreal, praeocular in contact with a large semidivided nasal. Body short, cylindrical; scales smooth, without pits, disposed obliquely, in 15 rows; ventrals rounded. Tail short; subcaudals partly entire, partly in two rows. Hypapophyses developed throughout the vertebral column.” (Boulenger 1893: 301)Description (genus): Maxillary teeth 16 to 20, small, equal; head not distinct from neck; nostril between two nasals, or between them and the first labial; eye moderate, with vertically subelliptic pupil; loreal present or absent, body short, stoutish, cylindrical; scales smooth, more or less oblique, without pits, in 15 rows throughout; ventrals rounded ; tail short; sub-caudals single or paired. Hypapophyses developed throughout the vertebral column. In all the species the mental is in contact with the anterior genials.” (Smith 1943: 324)Diagnosis: (1) two (seldom one) postoculars, (2) two temporals (seldom one), (3) the fourth supralabial touch parietal when temporal is one, and the fourth supralabial does not touch parietal when temporals are two; (4) ventrals 107–136, subcaudals 17–28 pairs (Zhong et al. 2015).Plagiopholis blakewayi is clearly distinguishable from P. nuchalis by the absence of a loreal shield, the lower number of posterior temporals (0 or 1 vs. 2 in P. nuchalis), and a lower number of supralabials (5 vs. 6 in P. nuchalis). Other points of distinction include that in P. blakewayi only the 3rd supralabial touches the eye and the 4th is the largest one, whereas in P. nuchalis the 3rd and 4th supralabials are in contact with the eye and the 5th is largest [from TILLACK et al. 2006].Description: “Rostral as broad as deep, visible from above: internasals much broader than long, a little shorter than the prefrontals; frontal hexagonal, once and one third as long as broad, longer than its distance from the end of the snout, slightly shorter than the parietals, which are squarely truncate behind; nasal large, twice as long as deep, divided below the nostril, forming a suture with the single præocular; two postoculars; temporals 1+1, first small, second large; five upper labials, third entering the eye; anterior chin-shields a little longer than the posterior, in contact with the symphysial and three lower labials. Scales in 15 rows. Ventrals 125 ; anal entire; subcaudals 31, fourth and fifth, and eighth to seventeenth entire, the rest in pairs. Dark purplish brown above, with two series of small black spots, grey on the sides whitish beneath, speckled with brown.” (Boulenger 1893: 301)Drawing (head): Smith 1943: 325
Psammophis brevirostris	Serpentes	Psammophiidae	Description (brevirostris; 207 specimens examined): Nostril pierced between 2 nasals; preocular 1, usually widely separated from frontal; postoculars 2; temporals usually1/2+3; supralabials 8 (very rarely 7 or 9), the fourth & fifth (rarely third & fourth, fourth only or fifth & sixth) entering orbit; infralabials usually 10 (rarely 9 or 11), the first 4 (rarely 3 or 5) in contact with anterior sublinguals; dorsal scales in 17-17-13 rows; ventrals 146-167; cloacal shield divided; subcaudals 79-108.  Dorsum olive brown, vertebral scale row usually with a pale median line, seven mid-dorsal scale rows often black-edged, forming narrow black lines; pale or with traces of pale transverse bars posteriorly and often faint crossbands on neck. Labials uniform yellow or white, sometimes with faint brown infuscation. Ventrum uniform white or with lateral series of black dots, a pair situated near the free edge of each ventral [BROADLEY 2002].
Mediodactylus stevenandersoni	Sauria	Gekkonidae	Diagnosis: A relatively small gecko, but a large Carinatogecko (snout–vent length more than 35 mm); scales and tubercles all over body strongly keeled (except labials, nasals and chin scales); dorsal scales heterogeneous; enlarged tubercles on dorsum, head, and limbs; enarged trihedral tubercles posterior to labials and anterior to eyes; ventral scales smaller than dorsal scales; dorsal scales on limbs homogeneous; 3-4 postmentals; lamellae in adults and juveniles elevated, swollen and broad; ventral side of tail without large plate-like scales; 14-17 regular longitudinal rows of tubercles on back; dorsal body colour brownish, venter dirty white; complete dark crossbars (regular or irregular) across dorsum, limbs, digits, and tail; dorsal side of head spotted; supralabials completely (in juvenile) or partly (in adults) dark; subdigital lamellae distinctly brownish (Figs. 5-7 in TORKI 2011).
Eutropis madaraszi	Sauria	Scincidae	Diagnosis: Maximum SVL 70.0 mm; supranasals widely separated; prefrontals widely separated; postnasals absent; second supraocular in contact with frontal; frontoparietals paired, as long as wide; parietal eye present; parietals completely separated by interparietal; nuchals one pair; supraciliaries five, third distinctly elongate; pretemporals two, either only the upper in contact or both in contact with parietal; primary temporal 1 or 2; secondary temporals two, separated by a tertiary temporal; supralabials seven; postsupralabial one; lower eyelid scaly; infralabials seven; first pair of chin shields in contact medially; dorsal and lateral body scale carination extends up to nuchals; paravertebrals 37–42; ventrals 48–59; longitudinal scale rows at midbody 28–31; keels on dorsal and lateral body scales 3–7; subdigital lamellae under fourth digit of pes 15–19; all digits with well developed median keels; dorsal coloration copper-brown with 6–8 series of dark brown longitudinal lines, and skin not fragile (Batuwita 2016).Comparisons. “Here I compare E. madaraszi to congeners from Asia, listing only opposing suites of character states. Eutropis andamanensis: six supraciliaries, primary temporal single, sub- digital lamellae under fourth digit of pes 29; E. austini: only upper pretemporal contact with parietal, two postsupralabials, lacking well-developed median keels under subdigital lamellae; E. beddomei: prefrontals in contact medially, six supraciliaries; E. bibronii: lower eyelid with a transparent window, 20–22 subdigital lamellae under fourth digit of pes; E. carinata: supraciliaries 6–7; maximum SVL 122.0 mm, first pair of chin shields separated by a single median scale; E. clivicola: prefrontals in contact medially, first pair of chin shields separated by a single median scale; E. dissimilis: supranasals in contact medially, prefrontals in contact medially, lower eyelid with a transparent window; E. floweri: first pair of chin shields separated by a single median scale, dorsum with a paired series of transverse black markings; E. gansi: postsupralabials two, first pair of chin shields separated by a median scale; E. greeri: postsupralabials two, skin fragile, paravertebral scales 31–34, body dorsum bronze brown; E. innotata: lower eyelid with a transparent window, six supra- ciliaries; E. longicaudata: supranasals in contact medially, postna- sal present; E. macularia: first pair of chin shields separated by a median scale, subdigital lamellae lacking median keels; E. multifasciata: prefrontals in contact medially, postnasal present; E. nagarjuni: two pairs of nuchals, prefrontals in contact medially; E. novemcarinata: supranasals in contact medially, lower eyelid with a transparent window; E. quadricarinata: prefrontals in contact medially, postnasal present; E. tammanna: prefrontals in contact medially, dorsolateral stripe absent, SVL up to 54.0 mm; E. rugifera: 22–27 subdigital lamellae under fourth digit of pes; E. trivittata: supranasals in contact medially, prefrontals in contact medially; E. tytleri: prefrontals in contact medially, postnasal present.” (Batuwita 2016).
Proctoporus chasqui	Sauria	Gymnophthalmidae	Diagnosis: 1) Head rounded in dorsal and lateral view, frontonasal length usually equal or slightly larger than frontal length; (2) nasoloreal suture present; (3) supraocu- lars four, anteriormost supraocular fused with anteriormost superciliary, all supraocu- lars separated from ciliaries; (4) superciliary series complete, five; (5) supralabial-sub- ocular fusion absent; (6) postoculars three; (7) postparietals three; (8) supratympanic temporals three; (9) genials in two pairs, transverse sutures perpendicular with respect to midline of body; (10) dorsal scales rectangular, juxtaposed, keeled; (11) transverse dorsal count (enlarged rows at midbody) at midbody 20–28 in both sexes; (12) lon- gitudinal dorsal count 35–43 in both sexes; (13) longitudinal ventral count 19–22 in both sexes; (14) lateral scale rows at midbody two or three; (15) femoral pores in males 8–11, in females 7–10; two scales between femoral pores; (16) subdigital scales on 4th finger 10–16, on 4th toe 17–26; (17) limbs overlapping, pentadactyl; digits clawed; forelimb reaching anteriorly to fourth supralabial; (18) anterior preanal plate scales paired; (19) hemipenis acapitate; flounces lacking calcified spines and forming two chevrons on distal half of hemipenis whereas basal half is covered with three transverse flounces; some asulcate flounces separated by a small expansion pleat; sulcate flounces about as wide as asulcate flounces; sulcus spermaticus single, flanked by a broad naked expansion pleat widened distally; (20) dorsum olive green, brown, or reddish brown with a middorsal pale stripe bordered by a discontinous dark line on neck and body more prominent in females than males; lateral ocelli present; ventral surfaces yellow- ish or reddish white; (21) transparent lower palpebral disc an undivided oval; (22) prefrontals present.Euspondylus chasqui can be distinguished from other Peruvian species currently assigned to Euspondylus by the following character states (condition for E. chasqui in parentheses). E. maculatus and E. guentheri: a lower palpebral disc with vertical sections (palpebral disc an undivided oval), dorsal scales smooth or wrinkled (keeled), and lon- gitudinal dorsal count 32–37 (35–43). E. caideni: by three or four superciliaries (five superciliaries), pale middorsal stripe absent (present), lateral ocelli absent (present), dorsal scales reduced in size above longitudinal band of laterals granules (not reduced), longitudinal dorsal count 41–48 (35–43). E. josyi: by having three supraoculars, ex- ceptionally four, (four supraoculars), pale vertebral stripe absent (present), lateral ocelli absent (present), limb overlapping 10–13 dorsal scales (10–12), longitudinal dorsal count 29–35 (35–43) and SVL to 62.0 mm (74.0 mm). E. rahmi: anteriormost su- praocular not fused with anterior most superciliary (fused), longitudinal dorsal count 49–54 (35–43), dorsal scales reduced in size above longitudinal band of laterals gran- ules (not reduced) and maximum SVL 71.0 mm (74.0 mm). E. simonsii: a pale line between the tympanum and shoulder present (absent), dorsal scales smooth or only faintly keeled on posterior dorsum (all dorsal scales keeled), longitudinal dorsal count 33–39 (35–43) and transversal count at midbody less than 35 (40–48). E. spinalis: head acuminate from the dorsal and lateral view (rounded), prefrontals present or ab- sent (prefrontals present), adpressed limbs overlapping by fewer than 10 dorsal scales rows (adpressed limbs overlapping by 10–12 dorsal scale rows), dorsal scales reduced in size above longitudinal band of laterals granules (not reduced), longitudinal dorsal count 39–46 (35–43), femoral pores on one side in females 1–6 (8–10) and small SVL, according to a population from Oso Playa, Pasco Department, ranging between 44.0–55.0 mm (SVL ranging between 50.7–74.0 mm). E. nellycarrillae: dorsal scales subhexagonals (rectangular), and longitudinal dorsal count 41–49 (35–43), femoral pores of one side 12–15 in males, 12–14 in females (7–10 in females, 8–11 in males), and maximum SVL = 60.0 mm (74.0 mm).Euspondylus chasqui can be distinguished from all species currently assigned to Petracola, Proctoporus and Riama by the presence of prefrontal scales (absent in all species in these three genera). E. chasqui can be further distinguished by the following character states (condition for E. chasqui in parentheses). All Bolivian and Peruvian species of Proctoporus except P. pachyurus and P. bolivianus: longitudinal dorsal count fewer than 36 scale rows (35–43 scale rows). P. pachyurus: longitudinal dorsal count 49–59 scale rows (35–43 scale rows). P. bolivianus: 4–8 femoral pores in males (7–11 femoral pores). All Petracola and Riama species: lower palpebral disc with vertical sec- tions (palpebral disc an undivided oval). Northern Ecuador species of Riama excluding R. columbiana: no band of granular scales along the sides of body between dorsal and ventral scales (granular scales present). R. columbiana: limbs not overlapping when adpressed against body in adults (limbs overlapping), superciliary series incomplete (complete), and some supraoculars in contact with ciliaries (all supraoculars separated from ciliaries).Euspondylus chasqui can be distinguished from Opipeuter xestus (condition for E. chasqui in parentheses): smooth dorsal scales (keeled); a single large elongate subocular (several small subocular scales); and in hemipenis morphology, large spines at the base of the sulcus spermaticus (no such spines present in E. chasqui) [from CHÁVEZ et al. 2011].
