Atheris barbouri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus Adenorhinos): “Generic diagnosis: Dorsal head shields small and keeled, one anterior and one posterior smooth temporal; suprarostral separated from nasals by nasorostrals; concave depression in posterior area of nasal shield (Figure 6), with a subcutaneous nasal gland; no duplication of dorsal scale rows; ectopterygoid with a lateral flange bearing a medial anterior process (Figure 3); palatine-pterygoid articulation an overlapping joint; no loreals; subcaudals single.”  (Broadley 1996)Description (genus): Skull: parietal bulbous laterally; ectopterygoid with lateral flange without spine and with a long anterior process adjacent to the maxilla; postorbital long and narrow: splenial absent, angular present. Head: top of head with small keeled scales; nasal single; nostril in extreme anterior area, posterior area having a depression, with a subcutaneous nasal gland; nasal in contact with first supralabial and preoculars and separated from suprarostral by a nasorostral; eye very large, one and a half times distance to mouth, with vertically elliptic pupil, completely surrounded by circumocular scales; temporals 1+ 1, enlarged and smooth; 5 to 6 smooth supralabials; 5 smooth infralabials; two pairs of smooth sublinguals with median groove; gulars smooth; proximal ventral scute in contact with posterior pair of sublinguals. Dorsal scales in 19-23 rows, imbricate and keeled, outermost row smooth; ventrals 114-128, smooth; anal single; subcaudals 14-22, smooth and single.” (Broadley 1996)
Agkistrodon bilineatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: “Shining deep black, with scattered white spots, arranged in narrow, distant, transverse bands the white spots are more numerous and irregular on the belly ; a yellow line runs from the rostral along the canthus rostralis and the supraciliary edge to behind the angle of the mouth. A yellow band along the upper labials, the lower margin of which is black. Rostral with a vertical yellow band, continued on the chin. Upper labials eight. Scales keeled, in 23 series. Ventrals 137 ; subcaudals 65, the 14 last double. This beautiful species appears to be scarce; Mr. Salvin found it only once on the Pacific coast of Guatemala: the specimen is 39 inches long.” (Günther 1863: 364)
Agkistrodon contortrix	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (contortrix): Combining characteristics for the subspecies A. c. contortrix, A. c. mokason, and A. phaegaster, we provide a diagnosis for A. contortrix. We find that the eastern copperhead (A. contortrix) is a medium-sized pit viper with an average adult size of 61– 90 cm and a maximum size of 132.1 cm (Gloyd & Conant, 1990; Conant & Collins, 1991), with a ratio of tail to total length of 0.11–0.17 in males and 0.11– 0.16 in females. There is a single anal plate, keeled dorsal scales and typically 23 midbody scale rows (range 21–25; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Subcaudals range from 38 to 59 in males and from 37 to 49 in females, whereas ventral scales number 139–157 with no variation between sexes (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Supralabials and infralabials range from 6 to 10 (mode 8) and from 8 to 12 (mode 10), respectively, and total postoculars + suboculars range from 3 to 6 (mode 4; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). A combination of geography and colour pattern distinguishes the eastern copperhead from related species. There are 10–21 dark crossbands on a brown, tan or grey background (or very dark or black individuals) in males (10–17 in A. laticinctus) and 11–20 in females (10–18 in A. laticinctus). Cross-bands are narrow at the midbody and widen toward the sides, described as hourglass or dumbbell shaped, and may be broken at middorsum (Gloyd & Conant, 1990), whereas they generally do not narrow at the midbody in A. laticinctus. The head is coppery brown or reddish–brown with a pale cheek stripe (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). The approximate range of this species extends from Connecticut to Florida along the Atlantic coast, west to include eastern Texas north through eastern Oklahoma into eastern Kansas, where A. laticinctus ranges from eastern Texas north to eastern Kansas (Fig. 5A). Hybridization with the broad-banded copperhead apparently occurs along an ecological transition zone from south-eastern Texas north to eastern Kansas, defined by an increasing elevation, decreasing precipitation, and transition from mixed forest and cypress swamp to prairie grassland (Bailey, 1995). Diagnosis may be difficult for some individuals in this area without additional molecular or morphological data and analyses (Fig. 5A) [BURBRINK & GUIHER 2014].
Agkistrodon piscivorus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (piscivorus): Combining characteristics for the subspecies Agkistrodon piscivorus piscivorus and Agkistrodon piscivorus leucostoma, we provide a diagnosis for A. piscivorus. The Northern Cottonmouth (A. piscivorus) is a mediumto large-bodied semi-aquatic pit viper with an average adult size of 76–114 cm and a maximum size of 188 cm (Gloyd & Conant, 1990; Conant & Collins, 1991), with a ratio of tail to total length of 0.13–0.19 in males and 0.12–0.18 in females. They possess a single anal plate, keeled dorsal scales and typically 25 midbody scale rows (range 23–27; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Subcaudals range from 38 to 53 in males and from 42 to 53 in females, whereas ventral scales number 128–142 with no variation between sexes (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Supralabials and infralabials range from 6 to 10 (mode 8) and 8 to 12 (mode 11), respectively and total postoculars + suboculars range from 1 to 4 (mode 3; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). A combination of geography and colour pattern distinguishes the Northern Cottonmouth from the Florida Cottonmouth. There are 10–17 dark cross-bands on an olive, brown or black background, whereas A. conanti features 11–16 crossbands. Crossbands in A. piscivorus are often indistinguishable from the ground colour in adults, yet may be prominent or subdued in adult A. conanti. The head is typically black or brown, lacking vertical rostral stripes; a dark cheek stripe is present in juveniles but may be subdued or indistinguishable from the ground colour in adults yet often present in adult A. conanti (Gloyd & Conant, 1990; Conant & Collins, 1991, BURBRINK & GUIHER 2014).
Atheris acuminata	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Closely related to A. hispida, but distinguished therefrom by the pentagonal rostral shield surmounted by two large suprarostrals (three in hispida); an enlarged weakly keeled frontal shield present, so that there are only five interorbitals (6-10 strongly keeled interorbital scales in hispida); only six supralabials (7-10 in hispida); mid-dorsal scales to beyond midbody with elongate recurved acuminate spines (such spines restricted to the head and neck region in hispida).Colouration. Yellow-green above, with a vague black H-shaped marking on back of head, a short black stripe extending from eye along lower temporals and black blotches on tail; interstitial skin black; eye mottled green with a gold border to the pupil in life. Ventrum pale greenish-yellow with black blotches posteriorlyand on tail.
Atheris ceratophora	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: “Diese interessante Vertreterin der bisher von Ostafrika noch nicht bekannten Gattung der Baumvipern unterscheidet sich durch den gedrungenen, vipernähnlichen Körperbau, den breiteren Kopf mi deutlicher Schnauzenkante, sowie namentlich durch die drei hornartig emporstehenden Schuppen über jedem Auge von ihren Verwandten auf den ersten Blick. Fügen wir noch die Schuppenformel: Sq. 27, V. 143, A. 1, Sc. 54, hinzu, SO wird eine Verwechslung mit den anderen Arten wohl nicht möglich sein. Es sind 11 -10 Supralabialen vorhanden, sowie 12-11 Sublabialen; von den Supralabialen, die durch zwei Reihen von Schildehen vom Auge getrennt sind, steht das 4.-6., beziehungsweise 4. und 5. unter dem Auge. Zwischen den Hörnern befinden sich neun Schuppen in einer Querreihe. Ein Paar Rinnenschilder, vier Gularenreihen, das erste rechts mit dem davorstehenden Rinnenschild (chin-chield nach Boulenger) verschmolzen, alle Schuppen stark gekielt, die lateralen Rumpfschuppen stachelspitzig, die Kiele schief nach hinten und unten gerichtet. Zwei Reihen von Schildehen zwischen Rostrale und Schnauzenkante (Vorderrand). Oben olivengrün mit unregelmässigen und undeutlichen schwarzbraunen Querbinden und gelblichen Flecken; unten gelbgrün mit feinen schwarzen Punkten an den Hinterrändern der Ventralen.Totallänge 420 mm. Schwanzlänge 70 mm; Rumpfdicke 10 mm, Rumpfhöhe 15 mm. Kopflänge 20 mm, Kopfbreite 16 mm, Länge der Supraorbitalhörner 1, 3, 3 mm.” (Werner 1895)
Atheris chlorechis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): Habitus slender, body laterally compressed, with high ventral and subcaudal counts and a short square head. Dorsal head scales small to moderate, more or less keeled; rostral fragmented, so that a wide shallow rostral is surmounted by 2-8 suprarostrals between the nasals and below the transverse series of internasals that marks the beginning of the dorsal surface of the head; transverse dorsal scale rows with frequent duplications or fusions as one moves from ventrum to dorsum; subcaudals single. Palatine-pterygoid articulation a simple overlapping joint; intra-pulmonary bronchus short (Broadley 1998).
Atheris katangensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description. Rostral three times as broad as deep, surmounted by three suprarostrals, the outer ones largest (the middle one may be split into three,two small ones below a larger one: Fig. 1h); 5 or 6 slightly rugose internasals Nasals separated from eye by 2 or 3 scales. Dorsal and lateral headshields strongly keeled, keels terminating in a knob, 9-11 interorbital scales and 20-22 across back of head between posterior supralabials. Eye moderate, its vertical diameter subequal to its distance from the lip, usually separated from the 9-12 supralabials only by the 14-17 circumorbitals. Mental about one and a half times as wide as long, infralabials 11, the flrst pair in contact behind the mental, followed by a pair of large sublinguals and five rows of gulars (the outer ones keeled) anterior to the first ventral. Dorsals keeled and pointed, the keel terminating at the tip, 23-31 rows at midbody lateral rows often duplicated and rows 4-6 very feebly serrated; ventrals133-144; subcaudals 38-49 (Broadley 1998).Colouration. Pale brown to olive or purple brown above, with a vertebral series of dark-bordered and dark-centred yellowish rhombic markings, tail tip yellow. Ventrum yellow anteriorly, sometimes becoming grey-green posteriorly,about every third ventral with a yellow lateral spot and a few ventrals with short black transverse bars (Broadley 1998).
Atheris nitschei	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: Broadley 1998: 121Colouration. Green above, with a black arrowhead marking on top of the head (often fragmented) and often a black lateral stripe from the tip of the snout through the eye. A series of irregular black dorsal blotches which may fuse to form a zig-zag pattern, many dorsal scales tipped or bordered black, tail tip blackish. Ventrum uniform lighter greento yellow-green or with a dark median streak. Juveniles dull grey-green to almost black, with or without black markings, tail tip white (Broadley 1998).
Metlapilcoatlus nummifer	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “Diese Giftschlange hat den Kopf einer Vipera, die Vertiefung zwischen Auge und Nasenlöcher wie Trigonocephalus, die ganzen Schuppen unter dem Schwanz wie Echis, dabei die vorderen Zähne des Unterkiefers besonders lang. Vielleicht ist es nur eine junge Crotalus mit unentwickelter Klapper” [original diagnosis of Rüppell 1845: 313].
Metlapilcoatlus olmec	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A member of the nummifer superspecles of Porthidium, dlfferlng from all other members In a lower number of ventrals (103-115 vs. 120-155); and from all except P. picadoi by a hlgher number of anterIor scale rows (27-28 vs. 21-25) [PEREZ-HIGAREDA et al. 1985].
Atropoides picadoi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis. Similar to T. n. nummifer but with 146-152 ventrals. (Dunn 1939) Description. The type is a female with 25 dorsals, 152 ventrals, 33 caudals. A female with similar data in the Vienna Museum has 151 ventrals, 34 caudals. I am indebted to Dr. Wettstein for the counts. A female with similar data in the British Museum has 146 ventrals, 37 caudals. I am indebted to Mr. Parker for the counts. I have examined all three of these specimens and they do not differ from typical nummifer save in ventral count.” (Dunn 1939) Diagnosis (genus Atropoides). Mexican and Central American pitvipers having entire subcaudals (with rare exception); ventrals 103-155; supraoculars reduced or fragmented medially into small scales; interoculars 7-12; subfoveal rows 1-3; prelacunal not fused with second supralabial; dorsal head scales moderately to strongly keeled; skull heavily boned; palatine in lateral view bluntly triangular with dorsal process medial or slightly anterior, not finger-like; frontals broad, total width at orbit greater than width of basicranium; postorbital narrow and curved, in contact with frontal (A. nummifer) or not in contact with frontal (A. picadoi); ectopterygoid broad entire length, not tapered in width posteriorly, lateral margin curves ventrally from a side view; pterygoid teeth extend to the end of articulation of the pterygoid and ectopterygoid (A. nummifer), or just beyond (A. picadoi); height of vertebral spinous processes at midbody much greater than length at base. (Werman 1992) Definition (genus Atropoides). Terrestrial pitvipers inhabiting low to moderate elevations from 40 to 1600 m; size moderate but stout, total length to 1078 mm; dorsal coloration tan to brown with darker dorsal blotches of rhombuses or diamonds (sometimes rounded) occasionally fused forming a zig-zag pattern; small lateral blotches along flank and posterior-lateral eye stripe present; dorsal head scales small and keeled; nasorostrals present or absent; supralabials 9-12; infralabials 9-14; ventral 103-155; subcaudals 22-40, entire or mostly so; midbody dorsal scale rows 23-31. (Werman 1992)
Azemiops feae	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): presence of the choanal process on the palatine, oviparity, large scales on the head and smooth dorsal scales (Zug et al., 2001; Orlov et al., 2002; Mallow et al., 2003; Orlov et al., 2013, Snetkov & Orlov 2017).DIAGNOSIS: No sensory pit between nostril and eye; body cylindrical; head flattened, above covered with large, symmetrical shields; nostril large, in single completely differentiated nasal; loreal shield present, small; 2 pre- and 2 postoculars; eye with vertically elliptic pupil; scales smooth, in 17 longitudinal rows at midbody; ventrals 180–18; subcaudals 42–53, mostly paired, occasionally anterior shields undivided; blackish above, scales often edged with gray, 14–15 narrow white or pinkish crossbands, sometimes interrupted middorsally, or alternating with one another laterally; head yellow with a pair of dark brown to black stripes of somewhat irregular width extending from prefrontals to the black color on the neck. Total length males 925 mm, females 820; tail length males 100 mm, females 80 mm (Leviton et al. 2003).Diagnosis: Viperid snake of medium-size of genus Azemiops, up to 700 mm in body length with a tail. The head is well demarcated from the body by neck interception, noticeably flattened, covered with symmetrical shields. Head has a trapezoidal shape with slightly rounded short snout. Nostril is located in a single nasal; loreal present; eye relatively small, with vertical pupil. The body is nearly round in cross-section, slightly flattened dorso-ventrally, ventrals rounded. Scales smooth, in 13 – 17 rows around the middle of the body. Tail short; subcaudals in two rows. Ventrals 169 – 180; anal entire; subcaudals 41 – 44 pairs. Upper surface of head (from the prefrontals) black, with a yellow median line. Pterygoideum with 11 teeth. Angulare very small, shorter than spleniale and much shorter than dentale. Dentale with 13 – 14 teeth. Quadratum long, directed downward and backward, and articulates with pterygoideum. 167 – 179 trunk vertebrae, 45 – 49 caudal vertebrae. Parapophyses without long ventral processes. Hypopophyses developed on all trunk vertebrae, they are much shorter than the spinous processes. Parapophyses without long ventral processes. A more detailed description is based on the specimen ZISP 25868, female. See Orlov et al. 2013:116 for details.
Bitis atropos	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (unicolor): Head scaling somewhat similar to that in typical atropos, but less strongly keeled and, over back of head, not so markedly elongate; outermost row of scales on body practically smooth anteriorly and but feebly keeled posteriorly; almost uniformly khaki to reddish brown above and apparently a smaller snake than typical atropos.
Bitis rubida	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “Bitis rubida is characterized by lacking, or having greatly reduced, elongate scales (*horns') in the supraorbital region, and by having a drab, usually reddish, dorsal colouration. It can be distinguished from other small Bits by various scutellation features. It differs from B. xeropaga in having fewer ASR than MSR (ASR equal to or greater in number than MSR in B. xeropaga; Haacke 1975), and lower ventral scale counts in both sexes (B. xeropaga males 147-154, mean 151.5; females 151-155, mean 152.4; Haacke 1975). It differs from B. atropos in having a raised supraorbital ridge. It differs from sympatric and southern populations of Bitis cornuta in having lower ventral scale counts in both sexes, fewer circumorbitals, and usually 29 MSR. Bitis cornuta usually has 27 MSR and a slightly higher number of dorsal blotches. It also differs from B. rubida in always having prominent supraorbital a 'horns' and usually a contrasting colour pattern of grey, white and black (reddish in a population near Lang Hoogte, 35 km east Kleinsee). Bitis rubida does not occur in sympatry with B. atropoides, which is restricted to coastal regions of the south-western Cape. The latter has much lower ventral scale counts (115-128), slightly lower subcaudal counts and rictals, usually 27 MSR, and a higher number of circumorbitals. B. atropoides also usually has obvious supraorbital 'horns' (although these are less well developed than in B. cornuta), as well as a grey-black-white colouration (that is less well defined than that of B. cornuta). Bitis inornata and B. albanica are restricted to the Eastern Cape Province and are well isolated from the western taxa, including B. rubida. The two eastern species are distinguished by having short tails in males, in which the hemipenes reach only the 6-7th subcaudal (9-10 subcaudal in the other taxa). Supraocular 'horns' are greatly reduced or absent in B. albanica, which also has a bold, contrasting, grey-black-white colour pattern, with fewer dorsal blotches than in the western taxa. Bitis inornata completely lacks supraorbital 'horns', and has a very drab yellowish-brown coloration, in which the dorsal blotches are greatly reduced or absent. The eastern taxa are allopatric and separated from one another by 150 km.” (Branch 1997)
Bitis schneideri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original Diagnosis (paucisquamatus). Eine Rasse von Bitis caudalis, durch eine sehr geringe Zahl der Ventralia (106 -107), durch eine bis auf die beiden Längsreihen wenig deutlicher Ozellenflecken rückgebildete Rückenzeichnung und viele rundliche, schwarze Fleckchen an den Seiten, besonders auf dem Außenrande der Ventralia, ausgezeichnet. (Mertens 1954)Original description of the type (paucisquamatus). Körperform ziemlich schlank, Schwanz für caudalis auffallend dick und lang, sich erst an der Spitze verjüngend. Kopfschuppen klein, gekielt, imbricat, 12 auf der Kopfoberseite von Auge zu Auge; 12 Schuppen rund um das Auge, kranzförmig angeordnet; keine Schuppen über dem Auge hornartig ausgebildet; zwischen dem Auge und den Supralabialia 3 Schuppenreihen; 11/10 Supralabialia; 3 Sublabialia jederseits in Kontakt mit dem Kinnschildpaar; dieses vom 1. Ventrale durch 4 Schuppenreihen getrennt. Rückenschuppen stark gekielt, mit Ausnahme der äußersten Reihe, die nur im vorderen Rumpfabschnitt schwach gekielt, sonst glatt ist; es sind 26-24-17 Schuppenreihen vorhanden; Ventralia 107 + 1, Subcaudalia 4 + 14/13 + 3 + ½ + 1. Oberseite sandfarben, Rückenzeichnung stark reduziert, nur Spuren von dunklen Ozellen, die in zwei Längsreihen angeordnet sind; an den Flanken, vor allem im Grenzbereich zwischen den Dorsalschuppen und den Ventralia rundliche, schwarze Fleckchen; übrige Bauchseite gelblich Kopf + Rumpf: 217 mm, Schwanz 26 mm. (Mertens 1954)
Bothrops bilineatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (smaragdina): Bothriopsis bilineata smaragdina is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothrops by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars pigmented to varying degrees but lacking regular series of cream round or C-shaped marks; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) most subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 192–220 and subcaudals 55–76 (Campbell and Lamar 1989); (7) loreal subtriangular, higher than long; (8) canthals broad and separated by 2–5 scales; (9) internasals in contact; (10) postocular stripe poorly defined or absent; (11) dorsum pastel green, finely peppered with black; dorsal bands absent; broken yellow paraventral stripe extending length of body (Harvey 2005: 4).
Bothrops oligolepis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothriopsis oligolepis is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothrops by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars immaculate in adults; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) subcaudals divided or with few entire subcaudals anteriorly; (6) ventrals 189–193 and subcaudals 54–65 (Campbell and Lamar, 1989, report 188–196 ventrals and 53–66 subcaudals for this species); (7) loreal subtriangular; (8) canthals narrow; (9) internasals in contact; (10) postocular stripe black and 2–3 temporals high; (11) dorsum bright green with black and yellow bands, each about one dorsal long; dorsal surface of head green with few black and yellow blotches (Harvey 2005: 6).
Bothrops taeniatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothriopsis taeniata is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothrops by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars mottled; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) subcaudals mostly entire (several divided subcaudals present on distal one-third of tail in 70% of specimens we examined; few divided proximal subcaudals present in 20%); (6) ventrals 203–254 and subcaudals 66–91 (Campbell and Lamar 1989); (7) loreal subtriangular; (8) canthals moderate, separated by 2–4 scales in our sample; (9) internasals in contact or separated by a single scale; (10) postocular stripe black, about two temporals high, and often stippled and obscure; (11) dorsum banded and with a lichenose pattern of green, black, and yellow; prominent row of yellow paraventral spots present; venter heavily pigmented posteriorly (Harvey 2005: 9).
Bothrops alternatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Scalation: There are 8-13 intersupraoculars, strongly keeled; 8-10 supralabials, none fused with the prelacunal; 12-14 infralabials; 25-35 (usually 27-31 in males and 29-33 in females) midbody dorsal scale rows; 155-183 ventrals in males and 164-190 in females; and 38-53 subcaudals in males and 30-44 in females.
Bothrops ammodytoides	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): Rhinocerophis differs from other South American pitvipers in 27 mitochondrial characters, and in having few (1 or 2) palatine teeth (versus 3–6 teeth), which is a morphological synapomorphy (Table 4). Distribution in southern South America, combined with terrestrial habitat in open areas, grasslands, swamps, or broad-leaf and Araucaria forests, distinguishes this genus from others (see Table 4). Rhinocerophis individuals have the maxillary fang shorter than the height of the maxilla, and show black bars on the gular scales of some species (R. alternatus, R. cotiara, R. fonsecai, and R. jonathani). Rhinocerophis have fewer subcaudals (25– 55) than the other genera (31–86), and some specimens have high numbers of supralabials (7–10, also seen in Bothropoides; other South American genera have 7–8). Rhinocerophis differs from Bothrops and Bothriopsis in having the prelacunal scale separated from the second supralabial. It differs from Bothriopsis in the lack of green coloration, and in the lack of a prehensile tail. It differs from Bothrocophias in the lack of tuberculate keels on posterior dorsal scales. Almost all species differ from Bothrocophias in colour pattern: whereas Bothrocophias species have spadeshaped dorsal markings lacking spots between the spades, Rhinocerophis species have spots between the spades (R. alternatus, R. cotiara, and R. fonsecai), have trapezoidal markings with spots between them (R. itapetiningae), or have a checkered pattern (R. ammodytoides). Only R. jonathani lacks spots between spades, but it can be distinguished by the presence of black bars on the gular scales, as mentioned above.
Bothrocophias andianus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops andianus is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothriopsis by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars immaculate in adults; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) most subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 166–179 and subcaudals 49–63; (7) loreal subrectangular and elongate; (8) canthals moderate and separated by 3–5 scales; (9) internasals separated by 1–3 scales, rarely (9%) in contact; (10) postocular stripe distinct and black; (11) dorsum dull green to brown with pattern of subtriangular blotches or French telephone-shaped marks; black edging of dorsal blotches becoming 2–4 distinctive rows of black blotches on posterior body and base of tail (Harvey 2005: 13).
Bothrops asper	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “De esta especie se revisaron 20 especímenes, 10 hembras y 10 machos provenientes todos de distintas localidades del departamento de Cauca al Oeste de la Cordillera Occidental y uno de Tumaco en la Costa Pacífica de Nariño (Mapas 1 y 2). Los ejemplares adultos son robustos y en el dorso presentan de 18 a 25 figuras triangulares oscuras (negro a café) en forma de equis, mariposas o corbatines; con bordes claros (gris a crema) a cada lado del cuerpo (Figuras 2 y 3) la zona inferior de la boca suele ser de color amarillo y el vientre de color crema uniforme. Los machos pueden medir hasta 160 cm y las hembras hasta 250 cm (Campbell y Lamar, 1989). Los juveniles machos tienen una coloración amarilla ó blanca en la punta de la cola (los últimos 10 a 20 mm). Una vez adultos, no hay una diferencia física externa que diferencie el macho de la hembra a excepción de un ensanchamiento en la base de la cola a la altura de la cloaca en los machos, debido a la presencia de los hemipenes. La cabeza es grande y se diferencia del cuello. El ojo es mediano y tiene una pupila elíptica. Tiene de 7 a 8 escamas supralabiales, de 8 a 12 escamas infralabiales, 1 escama loreal, 3 escamas preoculares, 2 a 4 escamas postoculares, 23 a 33 filas de escamas dorsales a medio cuerpo, escamas ventrales en machos 161-216, en hembras 187-240, Escamas subcaudales en machos 57-81, en hembras 46-70, una placa anal única. Tiene una raya oscura desde la parte postocular hasta el ángulo de la boca. El cuerpo tiene una forma ligeramente triangular. Las escamas dorsales son fuertemente guilladas, por eso el nombre específico es asper, la palabra en latín para áspero. Los termo-receptores se encuentran a la misma distancia de los ojos y la fosa nasal y está en contacto con la segunda escama supralabial, la escama mental es ligeramente más larga que ancha, la escama rostral presenta forma hexagonal, las escamas geneiales se presentan en disposición 2+2.” (Folleco-Fernández 2010).
Bothrops atrox	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: With the possible exception of a few problematic species of the Bothrops atrox complex (see Remarks), B. atrox is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothriopsis by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars pigmented to varying degrees but lacking regular series of cream round to C-shaped marks; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 182–200 and subcaudals 54–72 [Campbell and Lamar 1989 report 169–212 ventrals and 47–86 based on literature records from across the range of the species complex. Their wider ranges are based on published accounts that may not apply to the species occurring in Bolivia. Our definition is based on specimens we examined]; (7) loreal subtriangular, higher than long; (8) canthals narrow and separated by 3–7 scales; (9) internasals usually in contact, separated by one scale in 22% of the sample; (10) postocular stripe distinct and brown; two temporals high; (11) dorsum brown, pattern of subtriangular blotches or French telephone-shaped marks; venter uniformly and heavily speckled (populations on Andean slopes) or with alternating cream and charcoal, square blotches (Harvey 2005: 16).Comparisons among B. atrox Group Species.—Bothrops atrox, B. brazili, B. moojeni, and B. sanctaecrucis are rather easily confused with one another (Table 2). Bothrops sanctaecrucis occurs in sympatry with B. atrox in Beni and B. moojeni occurs with B. atrox in eastern Santa Cruz. Although not yet collected in Bolivia, B. brazili almost certainly occurs with B. atrox in La Paz and Pando. Of the four, B. atrox is the most easily recognized. Unlike the other species, Bolivian B. atrox have well-defined, high, dark brown postocular stripes. When present, the postocular stripes of the other species are one scale high (vs. 2–2.5 scales high in B. atrox). The venter of B. atrox is rather heavily pigmented and consists of staggered cream and gray to black (=melanophores) squares (lowland populations) or is uniformly and heavily speckled (specimens from the Andean slopes in La Paz). The venter of Bothrops brazili is also moderately to heavily pigmented, but the other two species have cream venters with only a very diffuse pattern not consisting of staggered squares. Bothrops brazili and B. sanctaecrucis may further be distinguished from B. atrox and B. moojeni by fewer than four (2–4 in B. brazili, 0–3 in B. sanctaecrucis) keeled scales between the canthals (vs. 2–7 in B. atrox and B. moojeni). In addition, B. sanctaecrucis has a pale green iris (pinkish copper to bronze in the other species) and Bolivian B. moojeni have curving stripes on their necks.In neonates and juveniles of these four species, the caudal oneto two-thirds of the tail is yellow. The tip of the tail darkens with age, but it is most distinct in adult Bothrops sanctaecrucis where the distal tail is black dorsally and ventrally sharply contrasting with the base of the tail. In the other species, the dorsal surface of the tail is about the same color as the dorsal blotches and does not sharply contrast with the dorsal pattern. Table 2 summarizes distinguishing characteristics of these similar species (Harvey 2005: 16).
Bothrops barnetti	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description:  T. barnetti is a small desert pit-viper closely resembling the fer-der-lance (T. atrox) but differing in its smaller size, lower number of subcaudals, and the enlarged terminal scute of the tail (SCHMIDT & WALKER 1943: 322).
Bothrops caribbaeus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description from GARMN (1887): Labials 7 to 8; lower lahials 8 to 11. Rows of scales 25, 27, 27; ventrals 197, 206, 209; subcaudals 64, 69 pairs. This serpent is more slender than that from Martinique; it has narrower scales and not nearly so many of them. In color the tendency is toward olive, more or less uniform; the brown blotches being almost obsolete in cases. Belly whitish to yellowish, with few or no puncticulations. Individuals vary from light olive with white belly to dark olive-brown with yellowjsh ventrals. The Martinique serpent is brown rather than olive; the brown blotches are more distinct, and the puncticulations on dorsals and outer portions of ventrals are abundant; the bellies are yellow. Individuals vary from yellow to black.
Bothrops cotiara	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops cotiara distingue-se de todas as espécies do genero pela combincão dos seguintes caracteres: supralabiais 8 ou 9, sem lacuno-labiais; sub-caudais 34-52 pares; intersupraoculares 10-14; dorsais em 25 a 29 fileiras de escamas no meio do corpo, normalmente 27, com quilhas que tomam todo o comprimento da escama; escamas ventrais 151-173.  Ventre de colorcão predominantemente preta, faixa negra pós-ocular larga sem formar gancho após a comissura bucal, como ocorre em B. fonsecai. Desenho cefálico forma uma “cruz de dois bracos” cinza esverdeada, no meio de uma grande mancha marrom muito escura, quase preta, havendo continuidade entre o claro da cruz e a cor de fundo do dorso, cinza esverdeado. (Hoge e Belluomini 1959, 1964 and others).
Bothrops jararaca	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: “A slender, terrestrial lancehead, B. jararaca may be as long as 160cm in TL (Brazil, 1911), although the average length is considerably less.The color pattern is extremely variable and is subject to many anomalies. The dorsal ground color may be tan, brown, gray, yellow, olive, or nearly maroon; it is usually somewhat darker  on the head and the anterior and posterior portions of the body. The dorsum of the head often bears diffuse dark markings on the occipital area, but these may be absent or obscured by darker pigment. A prominent, dark brown postorbital stripe extends from behind the eye to the angle of the jaw, usually encroaching on the posterior 3 supralabials. This stripe is bor­ dered dorsally by a distinct pale zone. The canthal region and supralabials are otherwise unmarked, although some speci­ mens may bear a dark spot between supralabials 3 and 4. The iris is gold to greenish gold with slightly darker reticulations. The tongue is black.The dorsal pattern consists of a series of pale-edged, dark brown trapezoidal or subtriangular markings on either side of the body, their apices on the vertebral line. These markings may be either opposite each other or partially to completely juxta­ posed; most individuals have all three variations. The pale borders of the brown markings are usually diffuse but broad, and the dorsal markings are heavily invaded basally by the paler ground color. The configuration of each dorsal marking is subject to considerable, and often extreme, variation, with elon­ gations, fusions, and fragmentations occurring. In some speci­ mens the middorsal region is unmarked and the dorsal pattern is reduced to a pair of undulating dorsolateral stripes. The inter­ spaces tend to have irregular, diffuse mottling, especially on the posterior third of the body. In many specimens the basal inva­ sions of ground color into the dorsal blotches may have distinct shapes with well-defined edges, creating a C-shaped mark resembling the outline of a headphone. The overall pattern becomes more concentrated on the tail, usually appearing as irregular pale gray markings on a dark ground color. The venter is pale greenish to yellowish white with irregular blotching or a powdering of gray pigment; alternatively, it may be uniformly gray. The tip of the tail of juveniles is white.Machado (1945c) and Lema (1960c) described color variants in which the middorsum was almost uniformly brown and the lateral dark blotches were drawn out into a broad, broken stripe.There are 5-12 weakly keeled intersupraoculars; 7-9 supra­ labials (usually 8; one record each for 6 and 10), the second fused with the prelacunal; 9-13 infralabiais (usually 10-12); 20-27 (usually 23-25) midbody dorsal scale rows; 170-216 (rarely as many as 218) ventrals; and 51-71 (single records for 35 and 44 doubtful) mostly divided subcaudals.” (Campbell & Lamar 2004: 391)Comparisons: “Five species of lanceheads at least partially sympatric with B. jararaca share a similar pattern and have the second supralabial fused with the prelacunal to form a lacuno-labial. Bothrops jararacussu is a larger, heavier snake with a dis­ tinctive dorsal pattern often including bold cream or yellow markings; the outer internasals are in contact with each other medially (separated in B. jararaca). Although there is overlap, B. jararacussu generally has fewer intersupraoculars (4-8) and fewer ventrals (166-186) than B. jararaca. Bothrops moojeni is a heavier snake that usually has 7 supralabials (usually 8 in B.jararaca), a pale venter (Brazilian populations), a higher and paler canthus, a narrower postorbital stripe that usually encroaches only on the 2 posteriormost supralabials, and a dis­ tinctive but poorly defined pair of sinuous nape markings. Both­ rops muriciensis has a combination of characters—including a relatively low number of ventrals, enlarged canthals, absence of a dark postocular stripe, fewer than 15 dorsal blotches, smooth intersupraoculars, and fewer than 26 interrictals—that distin­ guishes it from B. jararaca. Bothrops pirajai is a heavier snake that usually has 7 supralabials, 155-164 ventrals, and 43-53 subcau­ dals. Bothrops leucurus has a distinctly marked head and a pattern that includes numerous irregular dark spots and blotches in the interspaces within the primary system of dorsal markings; there are 7 supralabials, a slightly raised canthus, and considerable dark spotting on the labials.” (Campbell & Lamar 2004: 392)Sexual dimorphism: Siqueira et al. 2022.
Bothrops jonathani	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops jonathani is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothriopsis by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial absent; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) labials with distinctive pattern: white with tan or black edges; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) all subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 154–172 and subcaudals 37–42; (7) loreal subtriangular; (8) canthals narrow and separated by 4–6 scales; (9) internasals in contact; (10) postocular stripe 4.5 temporals high, brown edged in black; (11) dorsum pale brown with dark brown Xor V-shaped marks; venter heavily pigmented with charcoal blotches; (12) counts for dorsals (27–33), supralabials (9–12), infralabials (13–16), and interoculabials (4) unusually high for Bothrops (Harvey 2005: 18).
Bothrops lanceolatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): Bothrops differs from other South American pitvipers in 50 mitochondrial characters (Table 4). In addition, Bothrops species generally have four palatine teeth, which is a morphological synapomorphy of the genus (B. moojeni and B. j South American genera by having higher numbers of ventrals (157–236 and 153–227, respectively, compared with 125–206), and by having the prelacunal fused to the second supralabial (also seen in Bothropoides jararaca, B. alcatraz, B. insularis, and in some Bothrocophias). Bothrops is distinguished from Bothriopsis in its brown to black coloration and lack of a prehensile tail, except for Bothrops osbornei and Bothrops punctatus with prehensile tails. These two Bothrops species occur west of the Andes, as opposed to Bothriopsis species that all range east of the Andes.araracussu have five; B. brazili and B. sanctaecrucis have three). Bothriopsis and Bothrops are distinguished from other South American genera by having higher numbers of ventrals (157–236 and 153–227, respectively, compared with 125–206), and by having the prelacunal fused to the second supralabial (also seen in Bothropoides jararaca, B. alcatraz, B. insularis, and in some Bothrocophias). Bothrops is distinguished from Bothriopsis in its brown to black coloration and lack of a prehensile tail, except for Bothrops osbornei and Bothrops punctatus with prehensile tails. These two Bothrops species occur west of the Andes, as opposed to Bothriopsis species that all range east of the Andes [from FENWICK et al. 2009].
Bothrocophias microphthalmus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrocophias microphthalmus is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrops and Bothriopsis by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial absent; (2) dorsal keels tuberculate on posterior of body; (3) infralabials and some gulars brown with cream round or C-shaped marks; (4) canthorostrals usually present; (5) most subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals fewer than 160; (7) loreal elongate; (8) canthals moderate and separated by 3–5 scales; (9) 1–3 scales usually present between internasals; (10) postocular stripe distinct; (11) dorsum brown to charcoal, pattern of bands with distinctive row of black spots on dorsal row 4 of neck and cream stripe on anterior paraventrals (Harvey 2005: 11).
Bothrops moojeni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops moojeni is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothriopsis by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars immaculate; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 179–210 and subcaudals 44–70 (Campbell and Lamar 1989); (7) loreal subtriangular; (8) canthals narrow and separated by 4–7 scales; (9) internasals in contact (33%, 9) or separated by 1–2 scales; (10) postocular stripe absent or dark brown to gray and narrow: less than one temporal high; (11) dorsum gray to brown, pattern of subtriangular blotches; venter cream with very diffuse if any pigmentation except on edges; distinctive wavy occipital stripe extending onto neck (Harvey 2005: 19)
Bothrops neuwiedi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): Bothropoides differ from other South American pitvipers in 38 mitochondrial characters (Table 4 in FENWICK et al. 2009). External characters overlap with other South American genera, with no unique synapomorphies in scalation. Distribution in eastern South America, combined with terrestrial habitat in grasslands or broad-leaf forests (Bothropoides neuwiedi group), or semiarboreal habitat in Atlantic forests (B. jararaca group), distinguishes this genus from others (see Table 4). Bothropoides has fewer interrictals (21– 34) than the other South American genera (24–40), and some individuals have high numbers of supralabials (7–11, also seen in Rhinocerophis; all other South American genera have 7 or 8 supralabials). Bothropoides differs from Bothrops and Bothriopsis in having most species with the prelacunal separate from the second supralabial (B. jararaca, B. alcatraz, and B. insularis have the prelacunal fused to the second supralabial). Some specimens have both divided and entire subcaudals, a state also seen in Bothriopsis. Bothropoides differs from Bothriopsis in the lack of a prehensile tail and lack of green coloration. It differs from Bothrocophias in the lack of white spots on the gular scales, and the lack of tuberculate keels on posterior dorsal scales. Bothropoides differs from some Rhinocerophis (R. alternatus, R. cotiara, R. fonsecai, and R. jonathani) in the absence of distinctive back bars on the underside of the head (FENWICK et al. 2009).Diagnosis (species): More than half or all the supralabials of intense dark pigmentation with large round white spots. Dorsolateral blotches of well-defined contour, still more enhanced by white margins that detach them from the ground coloration. Prolonged occipital blotches, usually surpassing the quadrate-mandibular articulation and fusing to the first pair of dorsolateral blotches of the trunk forming the somewhat short postcephalic stripes. Head without melanism. Postocular stripe very marked and keels always with the same coloration of the dorsal scales. Blotches between two consecutive dorsolateral blotches are present. Two arrays of scales between the subocular and the 4th supralabial. Dorsolateral blotches of the trunk with triangular or semi-lunar format from 17 to 27 (modes 19 and 21).See another diagnosis in Harvey 2005: 20.
Bothrops sanctaecrucis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops sanctaecrucis is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothriopsis by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials and gulars immaculate; (4) canthorostrals absent; (5) subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 175–191 and subcaudals 55–65; (7) loreal subtriangular; (8) canthals wide, in contact or separated by 1–3 scales; (9) internasals in contact or rarely separated by 1 small scale; (10) post-ocular stripe absent or dark gray to black and narrow: less than one temporal high; (11) dorsum tan to pale gray with brown X-shaped or “French telephone”-shaped marks first edged in cream then in black; venter, labials, and chin immaculate cream (diffusely pigmented in juveniles); distal one-half of tail black in adults (Harvey 2005: 22).
Calloselasma rhodostoma	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Taylor 1965: 1058Description: Taylor 1965: 1058
Cerastes cerastes	Serpentes	Viperidae	Identification: Head broad, more or less triangular, flat and markedly distinct from neck. Snout rather short and broad. Eyes moderately large and directed laterally; pupil vertical. Usually with a single large, ribbed, hornlike scale above each eye. In some populations hornless specimens are quite common and sometlmes even dommant (e.g. a few populations in Libya; see KRAMER & SCHNURRENBERGER, 1963). Body cylindrical, stout and short; tail short. (Schleich et al. 1996: 534)Measurements: Total length 50-60 cm, occasionally reaching 80 cm (Ouarzazate region, S Morocco). (Schleich et al. 1996: 534)Pholidosis: Scales on upper head small with tubercular keels; rostral small transversally linear; nostrils directed upwards, in a small nasal. 14-18 scales around the eye; 4-5 rows of suboculars between the eye and the supralabials. 12-15 supralabials. Dorsal scales keeled, imbricate, in 26-37 rows at midbody. Lateral scales with serrated keels. 130-172 ventrals with sharp lateral keels; 25-42 subcaudals (paired). Anal entire. (Schleich et al. 1996: 534)Coloration: Very variable, obviously more or less depending on the colour of the sand on which the population lives. The basic colour of the upper side may be sand-coloured yellow, pale yellowish brown, greyish, orange-brown, reddish or brick-red with or without darker markings. They may form four to six longitudinal series of dark brown or greyish brown, occasionally sky-blue (e.g. in Tunisia; see STEMMLER, 1967, JOHANN, 1973) spots, which are frequently confluent, as only the two vertebral ones or bars across the dorsal region are present. Specimens with a broad red longitudinal dorsal band can be found in Morocco. Head usually unmarked, sometimes with dark spots (e.g. some populations of C. c. gasparettii on the Arabian Peninsula). A dark brown band runs from behind the eye to the angle of the mouth. Venter white or yellowish. Tail-tip sometimes blackish. (Schleich et al. 1996: 534)Sexual dimorphism: Females attain a larger total length than males. (Schleich et al. 1996: 534)SimIlar species: Hornless specimens are similar to Cerastes vipera and to the genus Echis. But the eyes of Cerastes vipera are directed upward and there are less than 130 ventrals. Echis can be identified by its undivided subcaudals. (Schleich et al. 1996: 534)Key to species: (1)15-21 interocular scales, eyes lateral; often witha "horn" over each eye: Cerastes cerastes (Schleich et al. 1996: 534) (2) 9-13 interocular scales, eyes directed upward; never with a "horn": Cerastes vipera (Schleich et al. 1996: 533, 537, Fig. 537/1)
Cerastes gasperettii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Ventrals, male 151-162, female 153-172; nasal shield large,separated from rostral and first supralabial by one row of scales; an enlargedsupranasal, bordered anteriorly by an enlarged scale; without a cluster ofenlarged scales on the mid-occipital region. (Leviton & Anderson 1967)Comparisons: Cerastes cerastes cerastes has 139-149 ventrals in males, 143-151 ventrals in females, and is found in Sudan and Egypt (at least east of the Nile) and the Sinai Peninsula. (Leviton & Anderson 1967)Sexual dimorphism: in subcaudal count is evident in the material from Sudanand from Libya (Leviton & Anderson 1967)
Cerastes vipera	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Tail short, tail / total length = 0.07-0.14. Nostril slit-like; 11-13 supralabials; eye moderate, separated from supralabials by 3-4 scales, pupil vertical; scales on dorsal side of head large, imbricate, 8-13 interorbitals; no supraocular horn; dorsals strongly keeled, 23-29 scale rows around mid-body; 102-120 ventrals, 18-26 paired subcaudals; anal entire (Anderson 1898, Werner and Sivan 1992, Jooris and Fourmy 1996). Dorsum sandy beige, with a pattern of small round spots in alternating rows along the back. Tail color and length is sexually dimorphic; females have shorter black tails, while males have longer tails the same coloration as the dorsum (Marx 1958). Venter plain white. (Baha El-Din 2006)Variation: Animals from the western Mediterranean coastal plain are reddish in color and more coarsely scaled. Jooris and Fourmy (1996) found that there is a significant relationship between temperature and scale character of this species; with higher number of ventrals and supralabials occurring in warmer, more southern localities of the species' range. (Baha El-Din 2006)Sexual dimorphism: see Sivan et al. 2023, Schleich et al. 1996: 534.Description: Schleich et al. 1996: 537
Mixcoatlus barbouri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “A small Lachesis with single subcaudals, 17 rows of scales, and an enlarged frontal shield” (Dunn 1919: 213).Description of holotype: Dunn 1919: 213Comparisons: Dunn 1919 compared the new species with (then Lachesis) godmani and aurifer. He also discusses generic assignments.
Cerrophidion godmani	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): see Campbell & Lamar 1992: 24.Definition and diagnosis: Rostral wider than high, front surface flat; three preoculars, upper largest, entire, and squarish, lower forming posterior border of pit and excluded from orbit; single, large, flat, plate-like supraocular above eye; seven to 11 supralabials; eight to 12 infralabials; canthals and internasals relatively large and flat; two to seven intersupraoculars; crown of head covered with variably sized, flat or keeled scales; keeling prominent in parietal area; second supralabial discrete from prelacunal; supralabial and subocular series in contact or separated by single row of scales; 19–23 (mode 21) middorsal dorsal scale rows; mid-dorsal scales at midbody moderately slender and pointed; 120–150 ventrals; 22–36 undivided subcaudals; tail spine straight, moderately long. Lateral edge of nasal broadly expanded, bone roughly quadrangular; frontal bones mostly flat, dorsal surface with slightly elevated margins, longer than wide; postfrontal large, not reaching frontal; transverse distance of postfrontal greater than its distance along parietal bone; posterolateral edges of dorsal surface of parietals forming low to moderately distinct raised ridge continuing posteriorly on parietal as low ridge; junction between parietal and prootic rounded to almost flat; squamosal extending to level posterior to posterior edge of exoccipital; ectopterygoid about same length as expanded, flattened base of pterygoid (posterior to the articulation with ectopterygoid) with flat shaft gradually tapering posteriorly; dorsal surface of parietal roughly triangular to sometimes rounded; three to five palatine teeth; seven to 18 pterygoid teeth; eight to 16 dentary teeth; pterygoid teeth extending just posterior to level of articulation of pterygoid with ectopterygoid in C. godmani, but not reaching this far back in congeners; maxillary fang relatively short, being about equal in length to height of maxilla; fang at rest extending to level of about middle of supralabial 5 or suture between supralabials 5–6 (after Campbell & Lamar, 2004 and JADIN et al. 2011).Diagnosis: Similar to other Cerrophidion species, C. godmani s.s. is a medium-sized, blotched, terrestrial pitviper. The head is relatively long, the canthal ridge is distinct and raised and two canthals are usually present. There are 3–7 scales (two in one specimen) across the top of the head between the supraoculars. The scales in the frontal region between supraoculars vary from being a single median scale to small, keeled scales approximately of the same size. The population in southeastern Oaxaca is characterized by having a large median frontal scale occupying more than two-thirds of the distance between the supraoculars; in all other populations individuals have median frontals that are undifferentiated from adjacent scales or that occupy less than half the distance between supraoculars. The supraoculars are broad and the nasal is divided. There are 2–5 prefoveals, a single prelacunal, no lacunolabials, a single loreal, 0–2 subfoveals, 3 preoculars, 8–11 supralabials (usually 9), 9–13 infralabials (usually 10 or 11), 132–150 ventrals (x = 140.57), 22–36 (x = 28.69) undivided subcaudals with no significant sexual dimorphism, and usually 21 middorsal scale rows. The cloacal scute is undivided. The tail is relatively short and non-prehensile [JADIN et al. 2012].Original description: Günther 1863: 364
Crotalus atrox	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: “Head subtriangular. Plates on head; 2 anterior frontals in contact, between these and superciliaries, on side of the crown, 2 imbricated plates. Space enclosed occupied by smaller scales. Superciliaries bordered by a row of larger scales; the anterior much largest. Three rows of scales between labials and suborbitals. Labials 16 above; 1st, 5th, and 7th largest;-15 below, 1st and 3d largest. Dorsal rows 25-27: 2 exterior rows smooth. On the tail 3-6 half rings. Color yellowish brown, with a continuous succession of dorsal lozenges, sometimes truncate before and behind intervals all narrow. A single transverse light line on superciliary. Stripe from superciliary directly to the angle of the mouth. General style of coloration somewhat as in C. adamanteus. Groundcolor above dull yellowish brown, with a series of subhexagonal patches from the head nearly to the tail, in an uninterrupted series, separated throughout by narrow lines. We may refer the markings to the intersection of two series of light yellowish lines, about 40 in number, crossing obliquely from each side across to the other, along the anterior half of as many oblique series of scales. The lateral decussation is along the sixth row of dorsal scales; on the back, where they cross, the lines are confluent for breadth of five or six scales, a making a series of transverse lines across the back, truncating the obtuse angles of the rhomboids, which would otherwise be produced. Sometimes the acute lateral angle of the rhomboids are also truncated. Laterally, the yellowish lines are more or less obsolete, leaving a more or less distinct chain pattern. The rhomboids or subrhomboids enclosed have a narrow margin of dark brown, lighter toward the centre. In all cases the interval between the successive rhomboids is but one or two half scales in width. The lateral rhomboids and triangles referred to in C. adamanteus are indicated by two alternating series of dark brown blotches, the first along the 3d and 4th lateral row, opposite the apices of the rhomboids; the second along the 6th and 7th, and alternating with the same; the spots occupy one scale, or part of four contiguous ones. Space between these rhomboids and the yellowish lines, dull yellowish brown. Beneath nearly uniform yellowish, slightly clouded on the sides of the scales. On the tail the blotches are confluent into 3 or 6 dark brown half rings, interrupted on the under surface. General distribution of lines on the head much as in C. adamanteus; a narrow light line from the posterior end of the superciliary backward, directly to the angle of the mouth; a second from the anterior extremity, nearly parallel with the first, the two enclosing an indistinct patch, and separated on the labials by 4} scales. There is also a single narrow light line across the superciliary perpendicular to its length, obsolete in old specimens. It may readily be distinguished from C. adamanteus by its light color and the truncations of the rhomboids, as well as the general obsoleteness of the lateral markings. The rhomboids are longer in proportion and more rounded. The two lateral rows of scales are smooth, the next two more strongly carinated than in C. adamanteus. The 5th upper labial is largest, and transverse the rest nearly uniform. The stripes on the side of the head are less distinct. From C. confluentus, it may be distinguished by the greater comparative size of the interval between the dorsal blotches, especially posteriorly. In C. confluentus, there are two light lines across the superciliary plate, dividing it into three sections, the central rather narrower. Here, too, the posterior facial stripe, instead of passing to the angle of the mouth, goes back of it on the 2d row above the labials, in C. atrox, passing directly to the angle of the mouth. Other important distinctions are seen in the narrower scales of C. con fluentus, &c. From C. lucifer, the more narrow head, fewer and larger intersuperciliary scales, lighter color, arrangement of color along the head, will at once distinguish it.” (Baird & Girard 1853: 5)
Crotalus catalinensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: This species is allied to the Crotalus atrox group, but differs from others of that group in being a stunted form, with a distinctive color pattern and oddly-shaped internasals. It can be distinguished from C. atrox by the excessively large postcanthal, which extends laterally to separate the preocular from the postnasal, from C. ruber ruber and C. ruber lucasensis in not having the first infralabials divided transversely, and from C. tortugensis both in having the dorsal blotches surrounded by well defined light scales and in having fewer punctations on the dorsal ground color (Cliff 1954).
Crotalus enyo	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (furvus). A distinctive subspecies distinguished from the pallid C. e. enyo by a very dark brown ground color and darker blotches and spotting; proximal rattle segment black; 10-12 (11.0) posterior body crossbands; the lacunal(s) wholly or partly separated, by 1-3 subfoveals, from the supralabial row; 3 scales (average) in minimum count between orbit and supralabials (Lowe & Norris 1954).Scalation (furvus): Scale rows, 25-25-21, with 1 1 at middle of tail; scales are strongly keeled, with first and occasionally second rows smooth on anterior and middle body, with all rows keeled an extreme posterior body and tail. Ventrals, 162; subcaudals, 29, of which the last 4 are divided. Anal entire. Supralabials, 13 — 13; infralabials, 13 — 14. First infralabials undi vided; first two in contact with genials on either side; mental triangular; neither intergenials nor submentals present. Rostral wider than high and in contact with supralabials. Internasals, 2. Minimum scale rows between supraoculars, 5. Nasals, 2-2. Loreals, 2, of approximately the same size, or larger than, upper. A postsupraloreal scale between supraocular and supraloreal. A single postloreal scale. Canthals, 3. Preoculars, 2, with suprapreocular larger. A preciliary scale in the upper anterior corner of eye. Minimum scale rows from supralabials to orbit, 3. Total scales in orbit, 9. Prefoveals, 6-4, subfoveals, 3-3, and postfoveals, 2-2, forming a complete row separating the supralabials from the lacunal on the outer margin of the pit floor. Rattle with 14 segments, broken near former tip (Lowe & Norris 1954).
Crotalus horridus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): Snakes of the genus Crotalus are small to large viperids characterized by presence of a rattle, a moderate (e.g., Crotalus stejnegeri) to extremely short tail, absence of a nasal pore, position of the facial pit below the naso-ocular line, and entire subcaudals (Burger 1971; Gutberlet and Harvey 2002). The dorsal head plates are heavily fractured in all species except the most basal member of the clade (Murphy et al. 2002), Crotalus ravus, which retains the colubrid arrangement of head plates (Harvey 2005: 24).
Crotalus lepidus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: “C. lepidus (TBL to 83 cm) is gray, greenish, pink, or tan with a pattern of 13-31 narrow, dark brown or black, irregularly spaced dorsal bands and 2-3 (1-6) similar bands on the tail. The bands are often bordered by paler pigments (particularly those anterior), and small spots or irregular gray mottling may occur between the bands. A pinkish brown stripe runs backward from under the eye to the corner of the mouth. The venter is pink to light tan anteriorly, but more gray toward the tail. Dorsal body scales are keeled, and usually either in 23 or 25 (21-26) anterior rows, 23 (20-26) midbody rows, and 17-18 (14-20) rows near the tail. Beneath are 147-173 ventrals, 16-33 subcaudals, and an undivided anal plate. Dorsal head scalation consists of a rostral (usually wider than long), 2 internasals that touch medially, 5-15 scales in the internasal-prefrontal area (a canthal is usually present on each side, but prefrontals are absent), 2 supraoculars, and 2 (1-4) intersupraoculars. Laterally are 2 nasals (the prenasal touches a supralabial, but the postnasal does not contact the upper preocular), 1 (2) loreal(s), 3 (0-7) prefoveals (a series of small scales anterior to the preoculars), 2 (3-4) preoculars, 2 (1-5) postoculars, 3 (2-5) suboculars, 12-13 (10-15) supralabials, and 11-12 (9-13) infralabials. The short, bifurcate hemipenis has a divided sulcus spermaticus, about 33 spines and 19 fringes per lobe, but no spines in the crotch between the lobes. Males have 147-172 (mean, 160.6) ventrals, 20-33 (mean, 25) subcaudals, and TLs 6.9-10.4 (mean, 8.5) % of TBL; females have 149-173 (mean, 161.2) ventrals, 16-24 (mean, 20) subcaudals, and TLs 5.4-8.5 (mean, 7.0) % of TBL. Adult males are longer than adult females. (Ernst & Ernst 2003: 509)GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION. Four subspecies are recognized, but only two occur in the United States. C. 1. lepidus (Kennicott 1861), the mottled rock rattlesnake, has a dark gray or brown stripe extending backward from the orbit to the corner of the mouth, no dark blotches on the nape of the neck, a mottled dorsal body pattern with the crossbands faded and only slightly distinct from the pale ground color, and a relatively dark venter. It is found from southwestern Texas (except the El Paso area) and southeastern New Mexico southward in Mexico to San Luis Potosí. C. I. klauberi Gloyd 1936, the banded rock rattlesnake, often lacks a dark stripe from the orbit to the corner of mouth, has two dark blotches on the nape of the neck, a darker ground color crossed by well-defined dark bands with little mottling between, and light-colored venter. This subspecies is sexually dichromatic: males are greenish and females gray (Jacob and Altenbach 1977). This difference may have evolved for background matching through natural selection influenced by predation pressure, and is a result of a sexlinked gene that either balances the percent of color morphs in the population or functions in sex recognition. It occurs from extreme western Texas, south-western New Mexico and southeastern Arizona southwestward to northern Jalisco, Mexico. Much variation in body coloration and pattern occurs between populations. Ground color of C. l. lepidus is set at birth, and seems to be an adaptation to the dominant substrate color of its habitat (Campbell and Lamar 1989; Vincent 1982a, 1982b; after Ernst & Ernst 2003).Diagnosis (klauberi): Distinguished from Crotalzcs lepidus lepidus by the absence of a dark stripe from the orbit to the angle of the mouth; a more vivid coloration, the pattern of dark brown or black crossbands contrasting strongly with the glaucous or greenish gray ground color, and equally distinct throughout the length; the absence of dark blotches between the crossbands or their restriction to small spots on a very few scales; and the light coloration of the belly.” (GLOYD 1936)Diagnosis (maculosus): A medium to small subspecies of lepidus differing from other subspecies in having a dorsal series of small spots often longer than wide and in a primary series averaging 29-31 spots. It also differs from other subspecies in that the dorsal spots do not extend laterally on each side of the body to form cross bars, except near the tail where the spots may form moderate cross bars (Fig. 1). C. l. maculosus differs from klauberi and lepidus in having an increase in the average number of ventrals and caudals, and from klauberi in that the ground color is heavily pigmented between the spots, a character shared with lepidus and morulus. It is further distinguished from klauberi by the heavy flecking on the ventrals, reduced number of scales between the supraoccipitals, presence of a postocular stripe, reduction in number of scales in internasal-prefrontal area, and by its smaller size. Crotalus l. maculosus shares with lepidus and morulus the dark ground color, postocular stripe and with morulus an increase in body spots, ventrals and caudals and paired occipital blotches. It is most distinct from morulus in that the upper preocular is divided and the anterior subocular is usually in contact with the upper labials. (Tanner et al. 1972)DESCRIPTION OF TYPE (maculosus). An adult male, total length (snout to first rattle) 591 mm, tail (vent to first rattle) 56 mm, head length 26.2, head width 15.5, fang length 4.1, rattle small, lateral width of proximal rattle 2.5, dorsoventral depth 5.4; ratio of tail into total length 10.55 percent, head into body length 20.42, head into total length 22.56, fang into head length 6.39, and proximal rattle into head length, 4.76. Scale rows on body 23-23-17, on tail at tenth caudal 12 rows, fringe scales around first rattle 10; ventrals 169, caudals 30, anal complete; supralabials 12-13, infralabials 10-11; preoculars 2-2 elongate, upper one divided horizontally, postoculars 3-3, suboculars 2-2, anterior subocular round, enlarged and in contact with the orbit and the fourth and fifth supralabials; one row of interoculabials between postsubocular and supralabials; anterior nasal largest and in broad contact with first supralabial and internasal; loreal angular; three small prefoveals between loreal and first two supralabials; three small postfoveals along lower margin of pit and above third and fourth supralabials. Rostral wider (3.8) than high (3.0), clearly visible from dorsal view, not deeply wedging between internasals; two internasals, not in contact with loreals and nearly twice as wide (2.7) as long (1.7), no canthal ridge on edge of internasals from snout to canthal; canthal large, approximately round and in contact with internasal, nasal, loreal, upper preocular, supraocular, and three intercanthals; four small scales (two rows) between canthals and posterior to internasals; supraoculars large and oblong, three rows of small scales between supraoculars near their middle, head scales posterior to interocular area smaller than those on anterior dorsal surface. First pair of infralabials in broad contact on the midventral line, completely surrounding triangular mental and wedging posteriorly between genials; genials large, elongate, and in broad contact posteriorly, in contact with first three infralabials anteriorly, and wedging between gulars posteriorly; five gulars between genials and first ventral. Dorsal pattern a series of 31 dark brown spots extending from head to tail; first spot (post temporal) divided and last four extended laterally to form broken or continuous transverse bars; spots often longer than wide and margined with a fine edging of light yellowish or golden brown; spots 2-3 scales long and 4-5 scale rows wide, becoming smaller posteriorly, until fusion with lateral spots forms bars. One row of lateral spots which becomes more obvious posteriorly and fuses with dorsal spots; no intermediate spots between primaries. (Tanner et al. 1972) Coloration: Ground color a dark brown, nearly uniform, but with some dark flecking particularly between the dorsal and lateral spots; venter heavily marbled with dark markings and flecks; head without marks on dorsum; a dark stripe from eye to temporal area; labials marbled, with less light markings on supralabials; snout a uniform dark brown. Tail with one complete bar and four lateral spots on each side, dorsal area posterior to first bar light brown, noticeably lighter than dorsum of body: proximal rattle rust red. (Tanner et al. 1972)Variation (maculosus): Tanner et al. 1972
Crotalus molossus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: “Muzzle broad; rostral small. Scales between superciliaries small, uniform, except the two anterior. Two frontal plates, four postfrontal. Two inter superciliary, all in contact. Five rows scales between the labials and suborbital row. Middle row, not extending beyond the middle of the orbit. Labials 18 above, fifth and sixth largest; 17 below. Dorsal rows of scales 29. Two external rows small. Tail uniform black. Color roll sulphur, a series of chestnut-brown transverse lozenges, with exterior corners produced to the abdomen. Centres of lozenges with one or two spots. Each scale but one color. A brown patch below and behind the eye.One of the most strongly marked of all the species. Head very broad in front; outline nearly rectangular. Rostral small. Two anterior frontals; behind these four plates, the exterior resting on the superciliary; behind these two other plates, between and in contact with the superciliaries. Anterior nasal subtriangular. Top of head with numerous smooth subtuberculous scales. Suborbitals large, extending to the anterior canthus. General aspect smoother than in Crotali generally, scales rounded at the posterior apex, carinated but slightly.Coloration: General color above that of roll sulphur, beneath pale yellowish, posteriorly very faintly clouded with brownish. Tail black. Anteriorly the scutella are entirely immaculate. Along the back is a series of transverse reddish or chestnut-brown lozenges embraced in a width of 12 or 14 scales and 4 or 5 scales long, and with the exterior angles produced to the abdomen. These lozenges are frames with the outline generally one scale in width and with the centres of the ground-color; sometimes divided by a median line of brown, so as to show two yellowish spots inside of the lozenges. The scales exterior to the lozenges are rather lighter. Sometimes the brown rings and the lozenges widen at the abdomen and indicate lateral spots of four scales; at others, and especially anteriorly, the rings are obsolete, and the brown is in a dorsal series. In fact, for the anterior fourth of the body we have a dorsal patch of brown, showing alternately at successive intervals one large yellowish spot and then a pair of smaller ones, owing to the confluence of the successive lozenges. 'The superciliaries and scales anterior to them, as well as a broad patch below and behind the eye, light greenish brown. Tail uniform dark brown above, paler beneath. Only one button with two necks, no rattle. A remarkable character of this species is that each individual scale is of the same uniform tint to its base, and not showing two colours as in other species.” (Baird & Girard 1853: 10)
Crotalus scutulatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS. A species of Crotalus distinguished from its congeners by the following characteristics: minimum scale rows between supraoculars usually 2, rarely 3; usually 2 large plates between the anterior portion of the supraoculars followed by 3 smaller ones; presence of a definite suture on top of the head dividing the scales in front of the supraoculars from those between them, with a reduction of the number of scales in front of the suture; postnasals not in contact with upper preoculars and contact not prevented by upper loreal, which is absent; postocular pale stripe usually only 1 scale wide, passing backward above the angle of the mouth; dorsal body blotches bordered by a complete row of pale, unicolored scales; tail conspicuously ringed by dark and white bands, the dark tail bands considerably narrower than the white ones; color of the dark tail bands changing from brown proximally to black distally. (Price 1982)DIAGNOSIS (scutulatus). Differs from C. s. salvini in the following characteristics: row of pale, unicolored scales bordering dorsal body blotches; dark postorbital stripe extending to angle of mouth or beyond; distal dark tail bands black, in contrast to posterior body blotches; upper part of proximal lobe of rattle matrix black (except in juveniles). (Price 1982)DIAGNOSIS (salvini). Differs from C. s. scutulatus in the following characteristics: dorsal body blotches without pale borders; dark postorbital stripe not extending as far as angle of mouth; distal dark tail bands not black, not in contrast to posterior body blotches; upper part of proximal lobe of rattle matrix only slightly, if at all, darkened. (Price 1982)
Crotalus stejnegeri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “A small Crotalus with a long slender tail, a very small rattle and with the first pair of lower labials long and produced backwards broadly in contact behind the symphisial.” (Dunn 1919: 214).
Crotalus willardi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: “Scales 25-160-24, length of body 380 mm.; tail 35mm.; head flat, the snout slightly elevated; rostral higher than wide in contact with the prenasals; scales on top of head small, the anterior ones slightly enlarged, and with their anterior edges elevated; preocular large, not divided vertically; scales in front of supraocular small; loreal single; supra labials 14; inferior labials 13; two rows of scales between supralabials and eye; eight rows of scales between supraocular plates ten rows between their anterior angles ; first three rows of scales without keels. Color light olive brown, more or less irregularly blotched with white; dorsal region crossed by nineteen lighter bands, each one scale length in width and narrowly margined with black; dorsal transverse bars about nine scale lengths apart ; no transverse bands on tail; ventral surface much speckled and mottled with black, becoming darker posteriorly; small black dots on sides, these most numerous near ventral region; supraocular light ash color; a large ashy blotch on occiput more or less reticulated posteriorly with darker; snout and region between supraoculars olive brown; a distinct white line one scale wide from upper edge of prenasal above pit to upper edge of seventh supralabial, passing obliquely downward to tenth supralabial and backward covering the last four supralabials ; a white line on lower half of first five supralabials, passing downward and backard on lower jaw to white on throat; the space between these bands brown; rostral with white median line. Comparisons: In general, this species bears some resemblance to Crotalus lepidus Kennicott. It differs in being light brown instead of greenish gray, and in having shorter transverse dorsal bars, which are much lighter than the ground color, instead of black cross bars, which are so characteristic of C. lepidus.” (Meek 1905)Description (obscurus): “A Crotalus willardi lacking all prominent white flashmarks on the head. Vestigial light areas may be present, especially along the last supraoculars, but are not the characteristic white flashmarks associated with the other subspecies. The low dorsal scale count at midbody (mode 25) and high number of subcaudals (average 30.1 in males, 25.9 in females) and light grey or brownish dorsal coloration are characteristic of this subspecies. The lack of white flashmarks on the head , the abundant melanophore fine-stippling on the surfaces of the head , and the light grey or light brownish ground color immediately set C. w. obscurus apart from the other known subspecies of C. willardi.” (HARRIS & SIMMONS 1974)
Daboia russelii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: No sensory pit between nostril and eye; head very distinct from neck, above covered by small, keeled, imbricate scales, 6–9 between narrow supraoculars; nostril large, in large nasal shield which, below, is fused to the rostral; eye, with vertically elliptic pupil, surrounded by 10–15 small scales, 3–4 rows of small scales separating the circumocular scales from the upper labials; temporals small; 10–12 upper labials; 27–33 longitudinal rows of scales at midbody, all except outmost row strongly keeled; ventrals 153–180; subcaudals 41–64, all paired; color above light brown with 3 longitudinal series of large black-margined brown spots or blotches, the vertebral series often merging to form a chain-like longitudinal stripe, occasionally an additional longitudinal series of small dark spots between vertebral and lateral series; yellowish white below occasionally with dark brown markings. Total length to 1600 mm are not uncommon (fide Smith 1943:484). [after LEVITON 2003]
Deinagkistrodon acutus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: “Snout produced into 8 pointed dermal appendage directed forwards, covered above by the internasals, beneath by a separate shield above the rostral, which is as deep as broad or deeper than broad; upper head-shields finely granulate; frontal as long as or a little longer than the prefrontals, shorter than the parietals; upper præocular separated from the posterior nasal by a loreal; one postocular and one subocular, separating the eye from the labials seven upper labials, second forming the anterior border of the loreal pit, third and fourth largest; three large lower temporals, anterior largest. Scales strongly and tubercularly keeled, in 21 rows. Ventrals 162-166: anal entire; subcaudals 58-60, mostly in pairs, 6 to 13 of the anterior single.Coloration: Brown above, with blackish-brown X-shaped markings or alternating >-shaped ones; head dark brown above, yellow on the sides, with a black streak from the eye to the angle of the mouth; yellowish beneath, spotted with dark brown and with a lateral series of large black blotches.Total length 1500 millim.; tail 200. Upper Yang-tse, China.” (Boulenger 1896: 524)Scale counts (4 specimens): “a-c. 3 males (V. 165, 166, 162; C. 59, 60, 58), from Mountains North of Kiu Kiang. (Types.) d. male (V. 163; C. 58), from Ichang.” (Boulenger 1896: 524)
Echis carinatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (multisquamatus): E. c. multisquamatus is “separated from all other snakes of this genus by the large number of ventral (av. = 188.1), dorsal (av. = 37.1), and lateral scales (av. = 10.3). Moreover, it lacks enlarged scales over eyes. The light wavy stripes on the sides of the body are present and are not divided in separate arcs as in all other species of Echis. The white stripes on the back are transverse and narrow. There is a crosslike figure on the top of the head.” [from CHERLIN 1981].Diagnosis (leakeyi): “Eine mittlegroße Sandrasselotter mit stumpfer Schnauze, kurzem Schwanz, großen Augen, stark verdunkelter Grundfärabung, stark reduzierter heller Kopfzeichnung und gegenüber Echis carinatus pyramidum (im engen Sinne) verminderten Schuppenzahlen” (Stemmler 1969: 90; which is, admittedly, a completely useless diagnosis).Description (sinhaleyus): “Costals at midbody 24-31 usually 27 or 28, V 136-153, usually 148, SC. 25-30, circum-orbital scales exclusive of supraoculars 11-13 usually 12 or 13, scales separating the supraoculars 8-9 8-9, usually 8, rows of scales between ey and labial usually 1 somtimes 2 or more, scales between nasal and eye 3, upper labials 9-10, usually 10” (DERANIYAGALA 1951: 148).Diaagnose (astolae): “Rückenzeichnung aus sehr zahlreichen (etwa 47) dunkelbraunen Querflecken bestehend, die durch sehr helle weißliche Zwischenräume geschieden sind. An den Körperseiten 1—3 Längsreihen kleinerer dunkelbrauner Flecken, die mit denen der Rückenmitte alternieren. Oberhalb von diesen fehlt die helle wellenförmige Linie der Festlandsottern, welche sonst die dunklen Flecken umsäumt. In der Körperform und Pholidose offenbar von den Festlandsottern kaum abweichend.” (Mertens 1970: 3).Original description: see Bauer & Lavilla 2021
Echis coloratus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The main differences between Echis omanensis and Echis coloratus involve the gular scales under the head being rounder and more numerous in the new species. The tail is longer, with more sub-caudal scales, and there are differences in some of the scales around thenostrilsandinthepatternof darkgreyblotcheson the head, back and flanks.
Eristicophis macmahoni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original diagnosis (genus): “Head very distinct from neck, covered with small feebly-imbricate scales: eye small, with vertical pupil, separated from the labials by small scales: nostril directed upwards and outwards, forming a valve-like slit at the summit of an enlarged nasal, the nasal separated from the rostral by an enlarged rostro-nasal shield. Body cylindrical, scales in 23 to 24 rows, with simple (i.e., non-serrated) keels, the keels not extending to the tip of the scales: lateral scales varying in size, not or hardly smaller than the dorsals, and hardly oblique: ventrals with a well-defined keel on either side. Tail short, sub-caudals in two rows.” (from Alcock & Finn 1897: 564).
Gloydius halys	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (halys). Dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody (very seldom 21 or 25); ventrals 141 – 187, sub- caudals 29 – 56; 7 – 9 supralabials. Total length up to 750 mm [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (halys). A moderately stout viper up to 530 mm total length in males, to 590 mm in females according to Gloyd and Conant (1990), but up to 750 mm fide Orlov and Barabanov (1999). Snout seen in profile recurved; supralabial scales usually 7-9. Apical pits absent. Dorsal scales in 23 (very rarely in 21 or 25) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 164- 178 (147-187 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999); subcaudal scales paired, between 42-49 (29-56 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999). Body with 33- 47 dark transverse bands, each 3-5 scales wide and extending down to scale row 3 or 2; light areas between blotches relatively narrow. Light line above dark cheek stripe on 1-1.5 adjacent rows of scales [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (boehmei, sensu Nilson, 1983). Total length 438 mm and tail 49 mm. Snout slightly raised. Dorsal scales, except lowermost row, strongly keeled on body and tail. At midbody scale rows are 23, apical pits absent. Two pre- and two postoculars on each side. Supralabials 7, sublabials 11. Ventrals 155, subcaudals 35, anal not divided [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (boehmei). A small viper up to 487 mm total length. Apical pits absent. Two pre- and two postocular scales on each side. Seven supralabial scales and 11 sublabial scales. Dorsal scales in 23 rows around midbody; ventral scales 155; 35 subcaudal scales paired, cloacal plate not divided. Body with 41 dark transverse bands, each 3-4 scales wide and extending down to scale row 7 or 8 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (caraganus). A relatively slender and moderately stout viper up to 735 mm total length in males (740 mm and more according to Orlov and Barabanov, 1999), to 530 mm in females. Snout seen in profile slightly recurved, supralabial scales usually 8 (71%) sometimes 7. Apical pits absent. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 149-167 (141-183 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999); subcaudal scales paired, between 33-47 (16-51 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999). General coloration is pale. Body with 36-50 dark transverse bands, not extending low on the sides and with relatively broad light areas between them [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (caucasicus). Total length up to 660 mm. Supra- labials 7 – 8, rarely 9; dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody (rarely 25); ventrals 142 – 169; subcaudals 31 – 46 [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (caucasicus). A moderately stout viper up to 660 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8, rarely 9. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 25) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 142-169; subcaudal scales paired, between 31-46. Body with 33-42 dark transverse bands, each 4-6 scales wide and extending down to scale row 3 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (cognatus). Total length up to 590 mm. Supralabials 7 – 8; dorsal scale in 23 rows at midbody, sometimes 21; ventrals 153 – 165; subcaudals 36 – 54 [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (cognatus). A small viper of the genus, up to 590 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows around mid-body; ventral scales between 153-165; subcaudal scales paired, between 36-54. Body with 29- 43 dark transverse bands, each 4-5 scales wide and extending down to scale row 4 to 2 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Description (mogoi): Bour 1993: 338 (in French)Diagnosis (stejnegeri). Supralabials 7 – 8; dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody; ventrals 147 – 165; subcaudals 39 – 46. Total length up to 625 mm [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (stejnegeri). A small viper of the genus, up to 625 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23 rows around midbody; ven- tral scales between 147-165; subcaudal scales paired, between 39-46. Body with 28-38 dark transverse bands, each 3-6 scales wide and ex- tending down to scale row 3 or 2 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (ubsunurensis). Halys pit viper of “Gloydius halys” complex is diagnosed by the combination of the fol- lowing features: (1) a large number of ventral scales (V+PreV) from 171 to 188; (2) a large number of sub- caudal scales: 47–53 in males and 42–46 in females; (3) a large number of light bands around the body: 35–41; (4) a large number of light bands around the body and the tail: 47–63; (5) a light background “desert” coloration of the body dorsal surface. For detailed comparisons see KROPACHEV & ORLOV 2017: 141.
Gloydius himalayanus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: Snout not pointed, not turned up at the end; internasals broader than long, much smaller than the prefrontals, nasal more or less divided into an anterior and a posterior part; canthal shield just reaching the upper surface of the head; 3 large inferior temporals, the scales above being much smaller; 5-7 supralabials, the 1st and 2nd sometimes united with one another, the last two united with the temporals. Scales strongly keeled, in 21 : 21: 17 rows; V. males 147-175, gemales 160-174; C. males 42-52, females 36-48, paired. Hemipenis extending to the 6th-10th caudal plate forked opposite 3rd-6th; the extreme tip is calyculate, the remainder spinose, the spines being small at the distal end, very large and few in number at the bifurcation ; some of them extend beyond the fork; sulcus lips very prominent. Brown above, with dark brown or black spots or wavy cross-bars, sometimes indistinct the spots sometimes confluent to form a festoon on each side of the vertebral line the interspaces between the cross-bars sometimes whitish a dark temporal stripe from the eye to the angle of the mouth, sometimes extending on to the neck upper lip light brown with dark spots ; brown below, uniform or speckled with black and white. (Smith 1943: 495)Sexual dimorphism: Dolia & Das 2023
Gloydius intermedius	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis. Total length up to 800 mm and more. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows at midbody. Supralabials 7 – 8; ventrals 148 – 175; subcaudals 34–52.Diagnosis. A large viper of the genus, up to at least 800 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23, very rarely 21, rows around midbody; ventral scales between 148- 175; subcaudal scales paired, between 34-52. Body with 28-45 dark transverse bands, each 3- 6 scales wide and extending down to scale row 2 or 1 [WAGNER et al. 2015].
Gloydius shedaoensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Total length up to 990 mm. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 24 or 25) rows at midbody; ven- trals 145 – 170; subcaudals 32 – 49; supralabials 7, rarely 8 [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (qianshanensis): The morphological distinctions between Gloydius shedaoensis qianshanensis and other congeneric species and subspecies are as follows: (1) medium size, TTL up to 730 mm. (2) three palatine teeth. (3) dorsum light gray and covered with dark gray irregular X-shaped pattern; (4) black postorbital stripe with white lower margin; (5) postorbital stripe width smaller than eye diameter but larger than half of the eye diameter; (6) head flat and slender, slightly triangular; (7) mid-body dorsal scales 23; (8) ventral scales 153–170; (9) subcaudals 33–49. (Qiu et al. 2023)Comparisons (qianshanensis): Gloydius shedaoensis qianshanensis belongs to the G. halys-intermedius group with 3 palatine teeth and 23-mid-body dorsal scale rows, which is different from the G. strauchi group with 21 rows of mid-body dorsal scales, including G. strauchi (Bedriaga, 1912), G. himalayanus (Günther, 1864), G. qinlingensis (Song & Chen, 1985), etc. It is different from the G. blomhoffii group with 4 palatine teeth, including G. blomhoffii (Boie, 1826), G. brevicaudus (Stejneger, 1907), G. ussuriensis (Emelianov, 1929), etc. The external morphology of G. s. qianshanensis is very similar to some taxa of the G. halys-intermedius group, including G. s. shedaoensis, G. intermedius, and G. changdaoensis Li, 1999. The results of PCA indicate that significant differences in head morphology exist between G. s. qianshanensis, G. s. shedaoensis, G. intermedius, and G. changdaoensis (Fig. 6). HL and PSW are the main indexes to distinguish the above species in PCA (Table 3). Furthermore, G. s. qianshanensis can also be distinguished by the following characters (Table 4): (1) light or dark gray dorsum (vs. brownish red or dark brown in G. intermedius and G. changdaoensis); (2) dark gray X-shaped spots appear on the dorsum (vs. dark and light cross striations interspersed in G. intermedius, rounded spots with light central color and dark margins on the lateral body in G. changdaoensis); (3) black postorbital stripe (vs. dark brown or brown in G. intermedius and G. changdaoensis); (4) postorbital stripe width less than the eye diameter but more than half of the eye diameter (vs. less than or approximately equal to half of the eye diameter in G. s. shedaoensis, approximately equal to eye diameter in G. intermedius and G. changdaoensis); (5) wider stripes cover 3–21 or 4–20 rows of mid-body dorsal scales (vs. stripes cover 5–19 rows of mid-body dorsal scales in G. s. shedaoensis). (Qiu et al. 2023)Description of neotype (qianshanensis, SYNU900701): Qiu et al. 2023
Gloydius ussuriensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Total length up to 650 mm. Dorsal scales in 21 rows at midbody. Ventrals 139 – 161, subcaudals 34 – 54, supralabials 7.Diagnosis (caliginosus): Gloyd 1972: 566
Hypnale hypnale	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Maduwage et al. 2009.
Hypnale nepa	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Maduwage et al. 2009.
Hypnale zara	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Maduwage et al. 2009. The original Type locality was given as  “Singapore” which is obviously wrong.
Lachesis melanocephala	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from other species of Lachesis by having the dorsum of the head completely black.
Lachesis muta	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from L. stenophrys and L. melanocephala by having more ventral scales (215–234 in females and 213– 236 in males), compared to 197–211 in females and 198–204 in males of L. stenophrys and 211–214 in females and 209–214 in males of L. melanocephala. Additionally, the head of L. muta is not uniformly black as in L. melanocephala, but has dark blotches over much of its surface; the head of L. stenophrys is nearly immaculate. The dorsal blotches in Lachesis muta do not form vertical bars laterally as in L. stenophrys and L. melanocephala.Diagnosis (genus): The only oviparous New World crotaline genus. Dorsal scales verrucate, parietals tuberculate, hemipenes with more than 70 spines per lobe, and twice-divided distal subcaudals.The diagnostic external morphological features of the genus include tuberculate, almost pyramidal dorsal scales and the twice-divided distal subcaudal scales (Campbell and Lamar 1989).See also Barrio-Amorós et al. 2020 for another description and images of key characters.
Lachesis stenophrys	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from L. melanocephala by having head that is predominantely unpigmented dorsally. Furthermore, L. stenophrys has fewer ventral scales (197–211 in females; 215–234 in males) than L. muta.
Macrovipera lebetinus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Identification: “A large, robust viper, often with a colouration very mimetic of the rocky substrate where it occurs. Length in most populations, 90-130 cm but can reach 150 cm, rarely longer than 2 m (records: 214 cm for Macrovipera lebetina obtusa, 230 cm for M. I. euphratica in southeastern Turkey). Thick, wide, triangular head very distinct from the body. Eyes have pupils with vertical slits, iris pale grey or slightly orange, marbled with dark in its lower part. Slightly prominent rounded snout; there is a string of slightly larger and preeminent scales on the sides of snout and head as far as the eyes. Nasal plate complex and divided with a hollow pit as large as or larger than the eye,which contains the nostril. The top of the head is covered in small keeled scales.The supraoculars are divided into 2 or 3 parts and are thus not always distinct. 3 (sometimes 2.5) rows of subocular scales between the lower edge of the eye and the supralabials. 11-18 scales around the eye. 10 or 11(rarely 9 or 12) supralabials on each side. Dorsal scales matte or only slightly shiny, usually arranged in 25 (rarely 27) rows at mid-body (but generally 23 on the isle of Milos). 128-181 ventral plates, anal scute undivided, subcordals divided and arranged in pairs.” (Geniez 2018)Coloration: “Generally quite variable colouration but dull and often with a remarkably "stony" aspect: pale grey, beige, sandy, yellowish, olive, greenish or bluish- grey, sometimes uniform red-brown or brick-coloured. On the back are 2 offset series of transverse markings that are sometimes attached to form an undulating bar, or on the contrary are joined in pairs to form well-spaced rectangular, transverse bars. These markings can be very faded, even totally absent (especially in M . I. obtusa and the red form of M . I. schweizeri). These markings are often browner, even redder, than the ground colour; they can have dark or pale borders. There is a series of dark vertical bars on the flanks thatalternate with the back markings. The body is sometimes dotted withminuscule ochre or yellowish spots. There is no pattern on the top of the head; head side often darker than the top; there is an often faded vertical dark mark under the eye and an only slightly contrasting dark temporal band from the eye to corner of the mouth. The belly is pale grey, whitish or grey-brown with much dark grey or blackish mottling.” (Geniez 2018)Diagnosis (schweizeri): Werner 1935 diagnoses this subspecies from bornmülleri, xanthina, lebeina (s.str.) and mauritanica by these traits: “Schuppen in 21 — 23 Reihen, unterste Temporalenreihen ungekielt, Supraoculare in kleine Schildchen aufgelöst; Subcaudalia Männchen 40—45, Weibchen 33—41”Diagnosis (transmediterranea): A subspecies of Vipera lebetina that is geographically separated from other subspecies by the Mediterranean Sea, and which can be characterized as a typical lebetina form having light ground colour with a pattern consisting of 34-41 transverse bars. Midbody scale rows 25 in number and the number of ventrals is between 150 and 164 in females; between 154 and 163 in males.This new subspecies differs from other taxa of the lebetina complex s. l. (except for V. lebetina and V. schweizeri, Table 1), in having a low ventral number. The mean values for different scalation characteristics indicate a higher fragmentation of head scales in this new taxon compared with other subspecies of lebetina as weil as withV. schweizeri and V. mauritanica (see Table 2). The mean value for the number of loreals, interoculars and 1st and 2nd circumoculars is higher than in any of the compared taxa. lt is most similar to the nominate subspecies, Vipera l. lebetina from Cyprus, from which, however, it differs in having a higher ventral count (150 to 164 in female, and 154 to 163 in male transmediterranea; 146 to 153 in female, and 147 to 154 in male l. lebetina), and in the number of anterior scale rows which range from 23 to 27 (X = 24) in transmediterranea and from 21 to 23 (X = 22.2) in l. lebetina. From the sympatric (or parapatric) Vipera mauritanica the new subspecies differs in colour pattern (V. mauritanica has a wavy zig-zag band containing 23 to 33 windings; V. l. transmediterranea has 34 to 41 transverse bands), the midbody scale rows are 25 in V. l. transmediterranea, 27 in V. mauritanica; the number of scale rows on the neck is around 24 in V. l. transmediterranea,between 26 and 27 in V. mauritanica; the number of ventrals is 150 to 164 in female and 154 to 163 in male V. l. transmediterranea,157 to 174 in female and 163 to 170 in male V.mauritanica; the number of subcaudals is between 37 and 43 in female V. l. transmediterranea, and between 45 and 48 in female V. mauritanica; corresponding figures for males are between 42 to 51 and 45 to 50 respectively.Size: Maximum length for both sexes is 98.5 cm. Relative tail length in the two males are 12.6 and 13.2% of total length, while corresponding figures in the two adult females are 10.1 and 13.1 %. (Nilson & Andren 1988: 373)Comparisons: for a comparison of meristic characters across schweizeri, turanica, obtusa, lebetina, transmediterranea, deserti, and mauritanica, see tables in Nilson & Andren 1988: 374.
Montatheris hindii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): “All dorsal head shields small and keeled; rostral horizontally divided, the suprarostral separated from the nasals by 'nasorostrals' (or lateral suprarostrals: Figure Ib); regular duplication of transverse dorsal scale rows, which have distinctive microornamentation consisting of numerous elongate erect lamellae (Figure 2b); subcaudals paired. Vomerine process of premaxilla much reduced (Figure 4b); palatine-pterygoid articulation a simple overlapping joint; intra-pulmonary bronchus short. Hemipenis with extensive naked zones, relatively short spines and no terminal awn or basal hooks.” (Broadley 1996)Generic description: “Skull ectopterygoid without a lateral flange or anterior process; postorbital bone long and narrow; splenial absent, angular present. Head elongate, depressed, covered with small elongate keeled scales, only slightly distinct from the neck; snout short, rounded and with well-marked canthus rostralis; rostral hexagonal, three times as broad as deep, surmounted by a large hexagonal suprarostral which is separated from the nasal by large "nasorostrals"; eye moderate, its vertical diameter slightly less than its distance from the lip; 11-13 circumocular scales; nostril large, directed laterally, pierced in an entire nasal; intemasals 4-5; supralabials 8-9; infralabials 8-10; a small triangular mental is wel1 separated from the first of two pairs of sublinguals by a median suJcus of the first infralabials; interocunasals 2-3; interorbitals 9. Dorsal scales in 25-28 rows at midbody, strongly keeled and imbricate, with reguJar duplications of lateral rows, the outer row enlarged and weakly keeled. Ventrals 130-138; anal entire; subcaudals smooth in 27-36 pairs. Hemipenis with a naked zone on the medial face of each lobe, extending from the fork of the organ to the apical region, where there is a short calyculate zone, the rest of each lobe is covered with relatively short spines, beginning proximal to the sulcus fork and, unusually for viperids, reaching maximum length halfway up each lobe. There is no terminal awn or basal hooks.” (Broadley 1996)
Mixcoatlus melanurus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: Müller 1924: 92Diagnosis (garciai). Subcaudal scales entire; a vertical horn-like scale, with an inner groove, over eye; scales in 21 rows; ventrals 146; subcaudals 40; supralabials 10 to 12, none entering pit. (Smith 1940: 62)Description of holotype (garciai). Head nearly three times as broad as neck; snout rounded, seen from above, slightly projecting in profile; rostral about twice as broad as high, projecting very slightly above edge of upper head scales; four convex internasals bordering rostral, the two median much smaller than the one on either side; nasal divided, the anterior section about twice as large as posterior, in contact with first supralabial; three scales forming inner edge of pit; two rows of small scales between pit and labials; one or two scales between pit and nasal; three rows between pit and eye; three or four rows between eye and labial; four canthals; median supra-ocular produced vertically as a broad "horn" three mm. high, 2.2 mm. long, and about a millimeter wide; horn with a deep vertical groove on inner surface and two or three shallow grooves on outer surface, radiating from base; scale preceding this somewhat larger than scales in frontal region, its posterior edge produced slightly upward against anterior edge of the horn; eleven rows of scales between horns; scales on sides of head not keeled, those on lower temporal region quite smooth and flat, others convex; lower temporal scales somewhat larger than or nearly the same size as posterior supralabial; dorsal head scales small, those posterior to frontal region heavily keeled and with small ridges radiating from the median keel of each scale; anterior dorsal head scales not keeled their full length, but with a prominent posterior knob; supralabials and infralabials eleven. Mental with a labial border somewhat greater than that of rostral; scales of first pair of infralabials in contact behind mental; one pair of chinshields, not much longer than broad; three labials in contact with chinshield; five pairs of small scales following chinshield, then one small median scale; all ventral scales smooth, flat. Dorsals in 23-21-17 rows, those of outer row not keeled, those of second row very weakly keeled, others rather strongly keeled; ventrals 146; anal entire; subcaudals 40, all entire. (Smith 1940: 62)Color. General ground color light tan, very slightly suffused with pink, rather heavily stippled with dark brown; a series of diagonal brown blotches, sometimes dark-edged anteriorly, down middle of back; blotches extending over six to eight rows of scales transversely, about three longitudinally; they are connected diagonally by narrower extensions of the same color about one and one-half to two scales wide, so that the general effect is a zigzag line down the back; small dark blotches, arranged in two rows, very dimly evident on the sides; a light postocular stripe, one and one-half to two scales broad, not sharply defined, extends from eye through temporal region onto anterior part of neck, there disappearing; below this a somewhat narrower dark brown stripe which involves the upper half of the posterior supraocular and disappears on side of neck; supralabials light except anterior scales; a dim, somewhat star-shaped light mark on occiput; upper surface of head otherwise dark brown. Infralabials, except anterior ones, pinkish cream, stippled with dark brown, and with a few well-defined small, very dark spots irregularly arranged; another dark spot, larger but not so well defined, on posterolateral gular region. Mental and anterior infralabials gray, heavily pigmented; other ventral head shields with scattered pigment. Belly and ventral surface of tail heavily pigmented, more posteriorly than anteriorly, with scattered light areas. Dorsal surface of tail nearly uniform dark brown, nearly black, the color extending onto ends of subcaudals; a brilliant white line extending from base of tail along second scale row to tip of tail, descending posteriorly until it lies upon the lateral edges of the subcaudals; a narrow, transverse white band across base of tail near anus. (Smith 1940: 62)Variation (garciai). In ventral and caudal counts the series is amazingly uniform. All have 146 ventrals, and the two with complete tails have 40 caudale (both males). In the two paratypes (U. S. National Museum and E.H.T.-H.M.S. respectively) the scale rows are 25-21-17, 23-21-17; supralabials 12-14, 10-11; infralabials 11-11, 11-12; scales between "horns" 13, 10; total length 407 mm., 449 mm.; tail 55 mm., 51 mm. The dorsal pattern of the female is obscure.  (Smith 1940: 62)Comparisons (garciai). The species is somewhat similar to Trimeresurus undulatus, but differs markedly in having entire instead of divided subcaudals, as well as in other less obvious characters. There seems to be no other described species similar to it. (Smith 1940: 62)
Ophryacus undulatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Definition and diagnosis: Rostral broader than high, moderately to distinctly concave; three preoculars, upper largest and undivided, middle not fused with supralacunal, lower small, somewhat excluded from margin of orbit; three to four supraoculars along dorsal margin of eye including supraocular spine; ten to 13 supralabials; lip margin not scalloped; nine to 14 infralabials; single scale above eye forming long, relatively slender spine, slightly compressed to sub- circular in cross section, not occupying most of dorsal margin of orbit, tip pointed; adjacent scales along dorsal ocular margin often also modified, projecting slightly; canthals and internasals often raised into short spines or with especially high keels; scales in the supraocular region small and keeled; ten to 20 (usually 12–18) intersupraoculars; top of head covered with small scales, most having tubercular keels; second supralabial usually separated from prelacunal by single small subfoveal; subocular and supralabial series separated by two to four rows of small, roundish scales; 21 mid-dorsal scale rows; mid- dorsals at midbody not noticeably broad, obtusely rounded; keel generally extending to tip of scale or nearly so, apical pits not apparent; free portion of apex of dorsal scales moderate in extent, barely over- lapping contiguous scale; interstitial epidermal fold at cranial end of scale well developed; 157–178 ventrals; 37–57 subcaudals, divided; tail spine straight, about as long as preceding two to three subcaudals, pointed or obtusely rounded.Frontal bones with concave dorsal surface, strongly elevated margins, moderately longer than wide; post- frontals moderate in size, not contacting frontal, comprising about equal amount of dorsal perimeter of orbit as parietals; posterolateral edges of dorsal surface of parietals forming distinct flat shelf continu- ing onto parietal as a raised ridge; junction between parietal and pro-otic irregular, not particularly angular; anterior portion of ectopterygoid possessing a shallow depression on medial side accommodating attachment of ectopterygoid retractor muscle; ectop- terygoid noticeably longer than expanded, flattened base of pterygoid (posterior to articulation with ectop- terygoid) with flat shaft tapering posteriorly; apex of choanal process positioned at about midlength on palatine, process moderately reduced in height, apex broadly rounded; dorsal surface of parietal roughly triangular; zero to one (usually zero) palatine teeth, seven to ten pterygoid teeth, seven to nine dentary teeth; pterygoid teeth extending to level of articula- tion of pterygoid with ectopterygoid; maxillary fang relatively short, only slightly longer than height of maxilla; fang at rest extending to level of suture between supralabials 7 and 8; splenial and angular bones fused; haemapophyses in contact distally.Dorsum with zig-zag pattern; ground colour olive- brown, green, or grey, sometimes orange or yellow pigment present; dorsal scales usually finely mottled or speckled with black [from JADIN et al. 2011].
Garthius chaseni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): not provided by Malhotra & Thorpe 2004, who established the genus based on molecular data only.Description: Stuebing et al. 2014: 283Description of the type. “Adult male. Snout moderate; eye very small, its distance from the mouth twice its own diameter; rostral a little broader than high; upper head scales large, subimbricate, obtusely keeled, four or five in a transverse series between the supraoculars which are very large; snout bordered above by five large scales, namely, three internasals, and one on either side between them and the eye; six supralabials, second below but not bordering the loreal pit, third highest and separated from the eye by two rows of small scales. Ten and eleven infralabials; a single pair of elongated sublinguals. Scales in 19.19.15 rows, the median rows strongly keeled anteriorly, feebly keeled posteriorly. Ventrals I43; anal entire; subcaudals 20 pairs. Tail not prehensile.” (Smith 1931: 29) Coloration: “Brownish above with irregular blackish, light edged blotches which posteriorly become transverse bands. Yellowish below heavily powdered with grey; an oblique black stripe behind the eye bordered below with white.” (Smith 1931: 29) Total length: 645 mm.; tail 45 mm. (Smith 1931: 29) Variation: “The paratype does not differ in any important particular from the type. Being immature its markings are more clearly defined. Ventrals 130; subcaudals 20 pairs, tail not quite complete. It is a female.” (Smith 1931: 29) Comparisons: “Trimeresurus chaseni is most closely related to T. monticola, from which it differs in the number of scale-rows, the fewer infralabials and several other smaller characters. T. monticola has been recorded from Sumatra (Boulenger, Fauna Malay Pen.. 1912, P. 216) but I am unable to find the authority on which this statement is based. Otherwise it is known only from continental Asia.” (Smith 1931: 29)
Ovophis monticola	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Body stout; snout short, a little more than twice the length of the diameter of the eye; head covered above by small scales rather than large shields, scales usually smooth, feebly imbricate; first upper labial not fused to nasal, completely separated by a suture; body scales, smooth or weakly keeled, in 23–25, occasionally 19 or 21 longitudinal rows at midbody; supraoculars large, 5–9 scales in a line between them; internasals usually not in contact with one another, separated by 2 small suprapostrostral scales; 7–10 upper labials, second usually fused to the scale bordering the facial sensory pit anteriorly, fourth and fifth beneath eye but separated from orbit by 2–4 series of small scales; ventrals and subcaudals (Myanmar, northeastern India and adjacent areas of China and Thailand) 137–176 and 36–62 respectively, Pseudelaphesubcaudals mixed paired and single, occasionally all unpaired (ventrals and subcaudals for southern China, Vietnam, Laos: 127–144 and 36–54, and Malaysian Peninsula: 133–137 and 22–28 respectively [fide Smith 1943:509]). Total length males 490 mm, females 1100; tail length  males 80 mm, females 150 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]Diagnosis: third supralabial larger than the fourth, paired subcaudals, 135–152 ventral scales (Malhotra et al. 2011, Appendix G)
Ovophis okinavensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: “Snout short, obliquely truncate, with sharp raised angle all round : eye rather small. Rostral deeper than broad; nasal divided; upper head-scales small, subimbricate, smooth on the snout and vertex; 6 to 9 scales in a transverse series between the supraoculars, which are large, larger than the eye; a pair of scales separating the internasals in front; three series of scales between the eye and the labials; temporal scales obtusely keeled; 7 or 8 upper labials, second entering the loreal pit, third largest. Scales strongly keeled, in 21 or 23 rows. Ventral 129-130; anal entire ; subcaudals 43-47 pairs.Coloration: Brown above, with darker cross-bands or alternating large quadrangular blotches ; upper surface of head dark brown, sides blackish, with a lighter streak along the temple; lower parts brown, with a series of blackish blotches on each side, partly on the ventrals, partly on the two lower rows of scales.Total length 350 millim.; tail 60.” (Boulenger 1896: 549)
Ovophis tonkinensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: fourth supralabial larger than the third, predominantly single subcaudals , 127–145 ventral scales. [MALHOTRA et al. 2011, Appendix G]
Porthidium lansbergii	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (venezuelensis = rozei): This subspecies difers from the nominate subspecies, known from Colombia and Central America, in having a lower ventral count, 142-144, as compared to 147-159 for B. 1. lansbergii, and in having the dark dorsal blotches much wider than the light interspaces. Moreover, venezuelensis has a maximum of 25 dorsal rows; there are from 27 to 32 subcaudals; normally there are nine (exceptionally eight or 10) supralabials, 10 or 11 infralabials, and 20 to 23 dark dorsal blotches (Roze 1959).
Porthidium nasutum	Serpentes	Viperidae	DEFINITION AND Diagnosis: “Bothrops nasuta is a relatively small pit viper ranging from about 162 to 463 mm in males and 156 to 635 mm in females. The dorsum is yellowish brown, pale brown, or gray with a series of 15 to 23 dark blotches, narrowly outlined with white, and a narrow white, orange, or orangish tan vertebral line dividing the blotches into right and left portions, which are frequently not aligned but rather alternate. The venter is heavily stippled with brown. The dorsum of the head frequently has a broad, arrow-shaped mark pointing anteriorly. The side of the head posterior to the eye is dark with a pale line extending ventrally from the anterior corner of the eye to the lip and one extending diagonally from the posterior corner of the eye to the angle, together outlining a dark subocular blotch. The chin is dark with white markings. Scutellation is as follows: 21-27 (x̅ = 23.0) scale rows at midbody; 123-143 ventral in males, 127-145 in females; 27-41 subcaudals in males, 24-35 in females, entire; supralabials 8-11 (x̅ = 9.4); infralabials 9-13 (x̅ = 11.4); canthal usually single; interna• sals paired, elongate, elevated anteriorly, usually in contact; intercanthals 3-7; postcanthals 1 -2, usually 1; interoculars 3-7; interictals 19 -28; prefoveals 2-12; subfoveals 1-7; suboculars 1-4; postoculars 1-4; oculabials 1-4. The loreal is wider than high. The upper preocular is large, extending dorsally over the cantal ridge. The middle preocular is divided or not, infrequently absent, in contact with the orbit or not. The lower preocular is single, infrequently absent, in contact with the orbit or not. The anal plate is single. The tail is not prehensile. Apical pits are absent. •The hemipenis is divided with a bifurcate sulcus spermaticus, the sulcus dividing close to the base of the organ and each branch extending to the distal end of the apical lobe. The basal portion of the organ and the areas lateral to and between the branches of the sulcus are spinulate. The shoulders and the absulcate side of the organ are covered with spines which increase gradually in size proximally, terminating with a pair of enlarged basal spines situated on either side of the sulcus. Distal areas of the apical lobes are calculate with papillate microornamentation" (Porras et al., 1981). Bothrops nasuta differs from other members of the genus in the following combination of characteristics: color pattern of dark, alternating middorsal blotches, separated by a pale middorsal line, on a paler ground color; subcaudals single; tail not prehensile; size small; supralabials separated from border of loreal pit by small row of scales; internasals elongate and elevated anteriorly; ventrals 123-145; canthal single; scale rows at vent usually 19.” (Wilson & McCranie 1984)
Porthidium ophryomegas	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis/Similar Species. “Porthidium ophryomegas can be distinguished from all other Honduran snakes, except fellow viperids, a by having a thermosensitive pit located between the eye and nostril. Agkistrodon bilineatus has 9-15 enlarged plates on top of the head (versus many small scales on top of head in P. ophryomegas). Atropoides indomitus and A. mexicanus have extremely narrow supraoculars or the supraoculars broken into small scales and usually 4-5 scale rows between the chinshields and first preventral (versus single, large supraocular scale on each side and 2-3 scale rows between chinshields and first preventral in P. ophryomegas). The species of Bothriechis have prehensile tails (versus non-prehensile tail in P. ophryomegas). In addition, B. marchi and B. thalassinus have green dorsal surfaces in life in adults and B. schlegelii has enlarged superciliary scales forming "eyebrows" (versus brown to black dorsal surfaces with darker blotches and no enlarged superciliary scales in P. ophryomegas). Bothrops asper has mostly paired subcaudals that usually number more than 50 (versus single subcaudal scales that number fewer than 50 in P. ophryomegas). Cerrophidion godmani has 21 dorsal scale rows at midbody, fewer than 150 ventrals, and usually 4-5 rows of scales separating the chinshields from the first preventral (versus 23-27 dorsal scale rows at midbody, more than 150 ventrals, and 2-3 rows of scales separating chinshields from first preventral in P. ophryomegas). Crotalus simus has a rattle or button on the end of the tail (versus no rattle or button in P. ophryomegas). Porthidium nasutum has fewer than 150 ventrals, one canthal scale on each side of the head, and a dorsal extension on the tip of the snout (versus more than 150 ventrals, paired canthals on each side, and no dorsal extension on tip of snout in P. ophryomegas).” (McCranie 2011: 518)
Porthidium yucatanicum	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “Snout turned up in front; rostral no more than one and one-half times as high as wide; scale rows 21 posteriorly; two lower preoculars subequal, both excluded from orbit; two large scutes on top of head bordering internasals and canthals, nearly meeting medially; loreal square; caudals 32 to 41 in females; bands on body single.” (Smith 1941)
Proatheris superciliaris	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus): Dorsal head shields small and keeled except for a pair of large rugose supraocular shields (Figure 5a); nasals in broad contact with rostral (i.e. no suprarostral shields: Figure 1a); no duplication of transverse dorsal scale rows; palatine-pterygoid articulation an interlocking joint (Figure 4e); intrapulmonary bronchus long; subcaudals paired.” (Broadley 1996)Generic description: “Skull: ectopterygoid without a lateral flange or anterior process; postorbital bone long and narrow (Figure 5b); splenial absent, angular present (Figure 5b). Head elongate, depressed, covered with small keeled imbricate scales and distinct from neck; snout short, rounded and with well-marked canthus rostralis; rostral hexagonal and one and a half times as broad as deep, in long contact with the nasals; eye moderate, its vertical diameter equal to its distance from the lip; a large rugose supraocular shield present; 8 to 14 circumorbital scales; nostril large, directed dorsolaterally, pierced in a semidivided nasal; internasals 1-3; supralabials smooth 8-11; infralabials smooth 10-13; a small triangular mental is well separated from the single pair of sublinguals by a medial sulcus of the first infralabials; interocunasals 2; scales between supraoculars 4-6. Dorsal scales in 27-29 (rarely 26 or 30) rows at midbody, strongly keeled and imbricate, the outermost row enlarged and feebly keeled to smooth. V entrals smooth 131-156; anal entire; subcaudals smooth in 32-45 pairs. Hemipenis deeply bifurcate, forking at level of second subcaudal, extending posteriorly to between levels of seventh and tenth subcaudal. Base o f organ, below bifurcation, transversely folded; basal half of each fork densely covered with enlarged spines; distal half covered with shorter and broader spines which merge into shallow calyces on tip of organ. Deeply divided sulci extend to base of short blunt terminal awn at tip of organ.” (Stevens 1973, Broadley 1996)
Protobothrops jerdonii	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 21 longitudinal rows at midbody (rarely 23); snout length a little more than twice diameter of eye; head above, except for large internasals and supraoculars, covered by small, unequal, smooth scales that are feebly imbricate or juxtaposed; first labial completely separated from nasal by a suture; internasals separated by 1–2 small scales; 6–9 small scales in line between supraoculars; 7–8 upper labials, third and fourth beneath eye, in contact with subocular or separated by at most a single series of small scales; ventrals (see Remarks below): males 164–188, females 167–193; subcaudals: males 50–78, females 44–76. Total length  males 835 mm, females 990 mm; tail length  males 140 mm, females 160 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Protobothrops kaulbacki	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 23–25 longitudinal rows at midbody; body elongate, head long, massive, with narrow snout; canthus rostralis sharp; single large, squarish loreal; first upper labial completely separated from nasal by a suture; second upper labial anteriorly bordering facial pit; 8–10 scales in line between supraoculars; supraoculars usually single, flat, without a vertical projection; dull grayish or olive green with large, blackish rhombohedral dorsal blotches, either distinct or united to one another; smaller spots on sides; symmetrical yellow lines on head; subcaudals paired; ventrals 201–212; subcaudals 66–78, some of the anterior scutes may be single, others paired; hemipenes with spines. Total length males 1340 mm, females 1410 mm; tail length males 225 mm, females 230 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]Original description: “Snout three times as long as the diameter of the eye: upper head scales rather small, unequal, smooth, scarcely imbricate, those on the snout larger than those on the crown of the head; supraoculars large, entire, 8-10 scales in a line between them; internasals large, broader than long, in contact with one another, or separated by 1 or 2 scales 2 enlarged scales in a line between the internasals and supraoculars ; 8 supralabials, first entirely separated from the nasal, second forming the anterior border of the loreal pit, third largest; anterior genials very large, followed by 5 or 6 pairs of smaller scales, the two series separated from one another by a deep mental groove no series of scales between the labial and the subocular; temporal scales smooth, the series just above the labials being much larger than the others.Scales in 25/25/19 or 17 rows, strongly keeled, except the outer one or two rows. V. male 205, female 204, C. male 75+, female 70, some of the anterior ones being single.” (Smith 1940)Coloration: “Olive green above, with a series of dark, diamond-shaped or angularvertebral spots, which may be united to one another and form a zig-zag band sides with much smaller and less distinct spots, corresponding in position with the vertebral ones each vertebral spot covers from 12 to 20 scales, which are green at the centres and black at the edges lower parts grey, with large, squarish or semi-lunar yellow spots throat and anterior part of the body mostly whitish top of the head black with yellow longitudinal lines, one extending from the tip of the snout tobetween the eyes where it divides, the arms diverging and extending backwards to connect above the angle of the mouth with a line which passes backwards from the eye nape with 2 parallel longitudinal lines upper lip uniform yellow.” (Smith 1940)Comparisons: “Trimeresurus kaulbacki is most nearly related to T. jerdoni to whichit bears a stong resemblance. It differs in the longer and narrower head, in the greater number of scales round the body, the greater number of ventral and in colouration. The head markings, although of the same pattern, are more clearly defined, as also are the dorsal spots.”  (Smith 1940)
Protobothrops mucrosquamatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 25 longitudinal rows at midbody; scales on upper surface of head, small, each scale keeled posteriorly; internasals 5–10 times size of adjacent scales, separated by 3–4 scales; supraoculars, long, narrow, undivided, 14–16 small interocular scales in line between them; 2 scales on line between upper preocular and nasal; 9–11 upper labials, first upper labial separated from nasal by suture; 2–3 small scales between upper labials and subocular; 2–3 rows of temporal scales above upper labials smooth, above those scales keeled; ventrals 200–218; subcaudals 76–91, all paired; grayish or olive brown above, with dorsal series of large brown, black-edged spots or blotches, and a lateral series of smaller spots; head above brownish, below whitish; belly whitish but heavily powdered with light brown; tail brownish (possibly pink in life [fide Smith 1943:507]), with series of dark dorsal spots; hemipenes spinose. Total length males 1122 mm, females 1160; tail length males 195 mm, females 205 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Craspedocephalus strigatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis (also see Whitaker & Captain, 2004). A species of Craspedocephalus (L8) endemic to the Western Ghats, characterized by having the following combination of characters: 2nd supralabial (usually) not bordering the anterior margin of loreal pit (vs. always bordering in the C. malabaricus, C. gramineus complexes); lacking a prehensile tail and green dorsum (vs. having prehensile tail and green dorsum in the C. gramineus, C. macrolepis complexes); having an undivided supraocular (vs. divided or with indented margins in the C. malabaricus complex) (Mallik et al. 2021).Description. Relatively stout species with a cylindrical body of snout to vent length (SVL) up to 391 mm and a tail of length (TL) up to 64 mm; dorsal scales keeled with anterior dorsal scale rows (DSR) 20 to 22, mid body scale rows (MSR) 19 to 21 and posterior scale rows (PSR) 15 to 17; head prominent, clearly distinguished from the neck with small juxtaposed scales on the dorsal surface of the head; rostral scale sub triangular with the upper side roughly half the size of the lower side with the tip visible from above; supraoculars separated by 9 to 11 scales on the posterior end; canthus rostralis distinct with three canthal scales; two to three preoculars, two to three postocular and a thin elongated crescent shaped subocular; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil; temporal scales smooth; aperture of the nostril completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and subrectangular; nasal scale bordering the first supralabial; loreal pit present in contact with the second supralabial with two scales between the nasal and the second supralabial; nine to 10 supralabials and 10 to 12 infralabials, with six to eight scales between the last supralabial, including the last supralabial till the start of the ventral scales; 1st, 2nd and 3rd infralabial scale in contact with the first pair of genials; a gap of three scales including the posterior genials followed by 134 to 142 ventrals, laterally separated from the dorsal scale rows by a slightly broader row of dorsal scales; anal scale undivided, followed by 38 to 44 divided subcaudals scales; terminal scale on the tail larger than the previous scale, blunt at the tip (Mallik et al. 2021).Colour in life. Bronze to light brown dorsum blotched with a stark, continuous alternating saddle-shaped pattern in dark brown to black, strikingly similar to the markings on Vipera berus or Gloydius himalayanus; preocular/temporal stripe in dark brown; post ocular stripe in dirty brown continuing towards the loreal pit and the infralabials; another stripe below the subocular stripe fades into the infralabials followed by another blotch towards the end of the infralabials; base colour of the infralabials and ventrals being light creamish to white in colour, of-ten dotted with rufous spots in the supralabials the region where the dorsal scales meet the ventrals in altenating dark brown colour and light brown/bronze colour scales; dorsal bronze scales are dotted with darker brown; the nape is characterized with a prominent horse shoe shaped marking hence earning its common name; in juveniles, the bronze colour is replaced with light brown (Mallik et al. 2021).
Pseudocerastes fieldi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis. A typical Pseudocerastes in having the rostral separated from the anterior nasal shield by small scales; scale covered horn-like projections over the eyes; lateral scales large and smooth; and ventrals not angulate. Distinguished from P. persicus Duméril and Bibron and from P. bicornis Wall by having only 21 rows of dorsal scales, two series of scales between the nasal and the rostral, and a lower number a of ventrals and subcaudals. (Schmidt 1930)Description of type. Body stout, with broad head, tail .11 of the total length. Rostral broader than high, bordered by five scales above, separated from the large crescentic anterior nasal by two rows of scales; nasal separated from the labials by a single row of scales; eye surrounded by a ring of 15 subequal scales; a horn-like, scale-covered tubercle, directed outward and backward above the eye; two rows of scales between the labials and suboculars; four scales between the nasals, ten between the supraocular tubercles; most of the head scales tuberculate or swollen at the tip; upper labial border sharply serrate, the lower lip fitting into a groove in the inner face of the upper labials; upper labials 13-13; lower labials 14-14, three on each side in contact with the single pair of enlarged chin shields. Dorsal scales with two apical pits, strongly keeled, the keels shorter than the scales and swollen posteriorly; several lateral rows nearly smooth, the outer entirely without keels; scale rows 25 (just behind the head), 22 or 21 (irregularly) at mid-body, and 17 just in front of the vent. Ventral 134, smooth, with no trace of sharp angulation or keel; subcaudals 35, the terminal six scale-like. (Schmidt 1930)Coloration (in alcohol): general color pale yellowish brown, with about 30 transverse darker bars across the back; many of the dorsal scales, especially bordering the dark bars, are punctate with dark spots, as are the ends of the ventrals and the subcaudals; ventral surface otherwise uniform pale straw-color; sides of head darker brown, due to two very obscure oblique dark bars below the eye, which extend to the lower labials; tip of tail black, sharply distinct from the rest of the animal. (Schmidt 1930)Measurements. Total length 726 mm.; tail 81 mm.; greatest body diameter 38 mm.; diameter of neck 13 mm.; greatest width of head 28 mm. (Schmidt 1930)Drawing (head): Schmidt 1930
Pseudocerastes persicus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Definition (genus): Head distinct from neck, covered with small scales; pupil of eye vertical; nostril directed outwards and upwards, in large undivided nasal shield (pierced between two small scales, a larger crescentic anterior and a smaller scale-like posterior [Gasperetti 1988: 350]) (nasal aperture in a large circular or crescentic shield, the upper part of the aperture leading into the supranasal sac [Smith 1943:490, fig. 155A]); supralabials with serrated lower margin and with inner groove to receive lower lip (The structure of the lips, to provide complete closure of the mouth, and the valvular prominence within the nasal aperture, are typical desert modifications against the ingress of blown sand. They are found also in Eristocophis [Smith 1943:490]); body scales in 21–25 longitudinal rows, none obliquely disposed; keels on body scales do not reach posterior edge of scale but end in swollen knob before outer edge, keels not serrated; ventrals rounded, without lateral keels; tail short, subcaudals paired (Leviton et al. 1992:114–115). [from BOSTANCHI et al. 2006].DESCRIPTION (of species; From Smith 1943:490–492, fig. 155): Head depressed, snout short and broadly rounded; diameter of the eye less than its distance from the mouth; nostril very large, pierced in a large circular or crescentic nasal, bounded above by a supranasal which may be broken up; two scales between the nasal and the rostral; scales on top of the head small, imbricate, smooth on the snout, keeled behind in the young, tuberculate and more strongly keeled in the adult; an erect horn-like scale above the eye surrounded by small scales; 9–12 scales on a line between the horns; 16–20 scales round the eye; 3–4 scales on a line between the eye and the nasal; temporal scales small, keeled; 13–14 supralabials, 4 series of scales between them and the eye, 1st pair of infralabials larger than the others; a pair of large anterior genials, the scales posterior to them being much smaller. Scales in 23 or 25:23 or 25: 19 rows, striated and strongly keeled, the outermost scales strongly overlapping the ventral scales. V144–158; C 34–49, paired. Hemipenis short, extending to the 8th caudal plate, deeply forked; the distal end is calyculate, the remainder spinose, the largest spines being at the proximal end; sulcus lips also spinose. Snout-vent length 688–690 mm, tail 80–85 mm. Grayish-brown above, with squarish, dark brown, black-edged spots, which alternate with one another on either side of the vertebral line, or are confluent to form cross-bars; sides of the body with rounded, less distinct spots; top of the head pale grey, upper lip and side of the head darker, the two colors meeting in a sharply defined line which extends from the eye to the angle of the mouth; whitish beneath, spotted with brown. In the adult the markings are much less distinct and may be almost entirely absent. In large adults, tip of tail often dark. An adult from Kacha, Baluchistan, is heavily marked and mottled with black and cream. Total length: 890 mm; tail 110 mm.
Sistrurus catenatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DEFINITION. Massasaugas are small to medium-size rattlesnakes (40-100 cm total length) with 9 symmetrical crown shields, short tails (7 to 12 percent of total length), and well developed rattles. Upper preocular usually in contact with postnasal; supralabial number 10-14; infralabials 10-15. Dorsal scales keeled except for lowest one or two rows, in 23 or 25 rows at midbody. Color pattern typically is seven rows of alternating dark blotches, those of median row largest and most conspicuous; tail with alternating pale and dark bands. (Minton 1983)
Sistrurus miliarius	Serpentes	Viperidae	RECOGNITION. S. miliarius is small (maximum TBL 83.2 cm, but typically 40-55 cm) with nine enlarged scales on the dorsal surface of the head (see also S. catenatus), a series of 22-45 (mean, 33) dark dorsal body blotches, one to three rows of dark spots on its sides, and a red to orange vertebral stripe. The body is normally gray or tan, but reddish orange to brick red individuals occur along the northeastern edge of the range, chiefly in Beaufort and Hyde counties, North Carolina. The venter is whitish to cream-colored with a moderate to heavy pattern of dark blotches. A black or reddish brown bar extends backward from the eye to beyond the corner of the mouth, and two dark longitudinal, often wavy, stripes are present on the back of the head. Dorsal body scales have keels, and occur in 23-25 anterior rows, 21-23 (19-25) midbody rows, and 17 (15-19) rows near the vent. The venter has 122-148 ventral scutes, 25-39 subcaudals, and an undivided anal plate. On the side of the head are 2 nasals, a loreal (lying between the postnasal and upper preocular), 2 preoculars, 3-4 (5-6) postoculars, 4-5 rows of temporals, 10-11 (8-13) supralabials, and 11-12 (9-14) infralabials. The hemipenis is similar to that of S. catenatus. Males are usually smaller, and have longer tails, which are thicker at the base (Bishop et al. 1996). They also have 122-148 (mean, 130) ventrals, 28-39 (mean, 34) subcaudals, 7-14 (mean, 11) dark tail bands, and TLs 10-15 (mean, 12.5) % of TBL; females have 123-148 (mean, 135) ventrals, 25-36 (mean, 30) subcaudals, 6-13 (mean, 9) dark tail bands, and TLs 9-12 (mean, 10.5) % of TBL. (Ernst & Ernst 2003: 557) Description (miliarius): S. m. miliarius (Linneaus 1766), the Carolina pigmy rattlesnake, is gray to reddish brown with a well-marked head pattern, one to two rows of lateral spots, usually 25 anterior and 23 midbody scale rows, and dark ventral spots at least two scutes wide. (Ernst & Ernst 2003: 557)DIAGNOSIS (barbouri). The most striking characteristic of this form is its generally dark coloration which alone is usually sufficient to separate it from either of the other 2 subspecies. Other distinctive characters are the obscure head pattern, 3 rows of dark blotches on each side of the main series, and the white ventral surface heavily blotched or distinctly spotted with black or very dark brown. It also has a higher average number of ventrals (5 to 10) than either of the others, and differs further from the western form in having the scale row formula 25-23-17 instead of 23-21-17. (Gloyd 1935: 2)DESCRIPTION OF TYPE (barbouri). Top of head flat, covered by 9 shields: 2 internasals, 2 prefrontals, frontal, 2 supraoculars, and 2 parietals which are recurved at the postero-lateral borders. The rostral is higher than wide, truncate at the top. The 2 preoculars, the lower of which is divided vertically, are separated from the postnasal on each side by a single high loreal which is in broad contact above with the prefrontal. The lower edge of the loreal forms the antero-dorsal border of the maxillary pit. There are 4 postoculars and 1 large anterior subocular on each side. The supralabials are 10 on each side, the third and fourth separated from the orbit by 1 scale, the anterior subocular. The scales of the lowest row of temporals are smooth, those of the upper rows keeled. There are 10 infralabials on each side, the first pair meeting in a long median contact behind the mental. One pair of chin shields, about 1.5 times as long as broad, followed by 4 pairs of median gular scales. The first ventral scute is separated from the posterior infralabials by rows of lateral gulars. Dorsal scale rows 25 a short distance back of the head, 23 at mid-body, and 17 just anterior to the tail; all rows are keeled at mid-body. Ventrals 143, caudals 36, the distal 4 divided. Anal plate not divided. (Gloyd 1935: 2)Size (barbouri): Total length 493 mm.; length of tail 63 mm. The rattle is composed of an incomplete set of four segments about equal in size. (Gloyd 1935: 2) Coloration (barbouri): Dorsal ground color brownish gray, densely stippled with brownish black. Top of head, rostral, nasals, loreals and preoculars brownish black. Upper labials almost all black; mental and lower labials white blotched with black. A blackish brown, light-edged stripe about 3 scales wide extends from the eye to the back of the head, 3 scales posterior to the angle of the mouth. A pair of elongate black blotches in the occipital region. A mid-dorsal series of 34 subovate black blotches from neck to base of tail. Anteriorly the individual blotches are narrowly outlined with white; posteriorly the edges are indistinct. Three lateral series of grayish black blotches on each side. The spots of the uppermost lateral series are less distinct and alternate with those of the mid-dorsal row; some of them extend across the midline as faint crossbands. The spots of the midlateral row are more conspicuous and are opposite those of the mid-dorsal series. The blotches of the lowest lateral row alternate with those immediately above and lie partly on the edges of the ventral scutes. The mid-dorsal stripe of reddish brown, which is conspicuous in some individuals of this species, is represented in the type specimen by a few bright brown scales between the occipital blotches and between the spots of the neck and anterior portion of the body. The dorsal pattern of the tail consists of 9 brownish black blotches broadening into crossbands and becoming lighter in color posteriorly. Ventral ground color of body and tail cream, heavily blotched and stippled with deep brownish black. Paratypes Nos. 12509 and 12511 are similar to the type in coloration, but a few of the anterior blotches of the mid-dorsal series are divided medianly, the halves alternating with one another. No. 12510 is more intensely colored and is a particularly handsome specimen. The ground color of dark grayish brown is densely stippled with dark gray. The mid-dorsal reddish brown stripe is very conspicuous between the brownish black spots of the dorsal series. The dark blotches of the main series are narrowly outlined with white and toward the posterior part of the body expand laterally, connecting with the spots of the mid-lateral series to form crossbands. The ventral surface is white with large, distinct spots of deep brownish black. (Gloyd 1935: 2)DIAGNOSIS (streckeri). The smaller number of anterior scale rows, 23-21-17, will separate most specimens of this subspecies from miliarius and barbouri each of which normally has 25-23-17. The pattern is distinet and very irregular: the blotches of the mid-dorsal series are conspicuously wider than long; there are but 1 or 2 series of spots on the sides, those of the midlateral series are usually higher than wide; the dark pigment of the ventral surface is diffuse, and the ventral blotches are usually not wider than 1 scute. The average number of ventrals is lowest in this form. (Gloyd 1935: 2)DESCRIPTION OF TYPE (streckeri). Crown covered by 9 plates, arranged symmetrically: a pair of internasals, a pair of prefrontals, a single 5-sided frontal, a pair of supraoculars, and a pair of parietals. Rostral higher than wide, apex truncate. Canthus rostralis distinet; edges of prefrontals, frontal, and parietals recurved. Nasals 2 on each side with nostril in suture between, anterior larger. Preoculars 2, the lower divided by a median vertical suture. Loreals 1 on each side, each almost as high as postnasal, in contact with prefrontal, and completely separating postnasal from preocular. Orbit separated from third and fourth supralabials by 1 large anterior subocular, and from the fourth and fifth supralabials by 2 scales the upper of which is very small. Postoculars 5 one each side. Supralabials 11 on the left side, 10 on the right. Infralabials 11 on each side. Temporals keeled, except those of the lowest row. First pair of infralabials in broad contact at the mid-line immediately posterior to the tip of the mental. One pair of chin shields, each about twice as long as wide. Four transverse rows of median gulars; first ventral scute separated from posterior infralabials by 5 rows of lateral gulars. Dorsal scale rows 23-21-18, all strongly carinate except those of the lowest row of each side on which the keels are faint. Ventral scutes 126; anal plate not divided; subcaudal scales 33, the last 2 divided. (Gloyd 1935: 2)Size (streckeri): Total length 535 mm.; length of tail 68 mm. Rattle incomplete, consisting of 3 segments. (Gloyd 1935: 2)Coloration (streckeri): Dorsal ground color of fresh specimen in alcohol pale grayish brown, lightly stippled and flecked with brown. Top of head with irregular brown blotches on internasals and prefrontals, a wide transverse bar of pale brown on frontal and supraoculars, and a pair of undulating stripes extending backward from the posterior edges of the supraoculars to the neck. An indistinct vertical brown streak in the middle of the nostril; a brown spot on the nasal scales above nostril. A conspicuous cheek stripe of dark brown extends from the orbit to the angle of the jaw, and beneath this is a white line from below the orbit to the last supralabial. Supralabials stippled with brown, more densely posteriorly. Mental, infralabials, chin shields, and gulars cream, irregularly stippled, flecked, and blotched with. brown. The body pattern consists of a median dorsal series of dark brown blotches, about 30 in number, some divided and alternating, and 2 lateral series of brown blotches, the lowest of which is less distinct and lies partly on the ventral surface. The blotches of the dorsal series are conspicuously wider than long, with irregular margins, and narrowly outlined with white. An indistinct mid-dorsal stripe of reddish brown, on the scales of the median row and portions of the adjacent rows, extends from the occipital region to the base of the tail. The blotches of the upper lateral series are opposite those of the dorsal series, noticeably higher than wide, and irregularly outlined with white. There are 11 irregular transverse brown bands on the tail. Ventral surface cream, irregularly blotched laterally with grayish brown. The blotches are variable in size and sharpness, and in the main each is confined to a single ventral scute. (Gloyd 1935: 2)
Crotalus ravus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (ravus): A subspecies of S. ravus (Figs. 1, 2) distinguished from other races (Table 1) by normally having the dorsal scales in 21 rows at midbody, total prefoveals usually fewer than 3, a large rattle (dorsoventral width of proximal rattle segment usually exceeding 10% of tail length in males, 13% in females), and 2-4 tail bands in both sexes (from CAMPBELL & ARMSTRONG 1979).Diagnosis (exiguus): A subspecies of S. ravus distinguished from the other races (Table 1) by having the parietal scales divided trans- versely, the dorsal scales in 23 rows at mid- body, total prefoveals usually numbering six or more, a small rattle (PRW usually less than 10% of tail length in males, 13% in females), 3 to 6 tail bands in males, and 2 to 4 tail bands in females [from CAMPBELL & ARMSTRONG 1979].Diagnosis (brunneus): A subspecies of S. ravus (Fig. 8) distinguished from the other races (Table 1) by having the parietals usually undi- vided, dorsal scales usually in 23 rows at midbody, total prefoveals usually exceeding 3 but not more than 6, a small rattle (PRW usually less than 109 of tail length in males, 13% in females), 5-8 tail bands in males, and 4-6 in females. The brief description of the holotype by Harris and Simmons (1978) contains two errors. There are 144 ventrals (not 148) and the total length is approxi- mately 660 mm (not 640 mm) [from CAMPBELL & ARMSTRONG 1979].
Trimeresurus albolabris	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 21 (rarely 19) longitudinal rows at midbody; 10–11(12) upper labials, the first partially or completely fused to the nasal; head scales small, subequal, feebly imbricate, smooth or weakly keeled; supraoculars narrow, occasionally enlarged, undivided, 8–12 interocular scales between them; temporal scales smooth; green above, side of head below eyes yellow, white or pale green, much lighter than rest of head; below, green, yellowish or white below, a light ventrolateral stripe present in all males, absent in females; end of tail not mottled brown; ventrals: males 155–166, females 152–176; subcaudals: males 60–72, females 49–66, paired; hemipenes without spines. Total length males 600 mm, females 810; tail length males 120 mm, females 130 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Trimeresurus andersonii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Characters (Andaman islands): “Dorsal scales feebly keeled, in 21:21–23:15–19 rows; ventrals 175–185; subcaudals 55–77, divided; anal single; preoculars 2; postoculars 2–3; cephalic scales 10–12. Females tend to be of a lighter shade of creamy yellow to light brown; males are normally a bit darker with coffee brown to darker shades with or without intermittent black or brown banded pattern. Venter plain or alternatively banded with dark brown and white.” (Chandramouli 2022)
Craspedocephalus borneensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus, endemic to Borneo Island according to the present definition, characterized by the combination of the following characters: (1) an overall grey, brown or ochre pattern with 20–30 darker crossbands, distinctly related to the sex: in males, background colour in various shades of greyish-brown or yellowish- grey, with darker dorsolateral blotches, sometimes horizontally divided into two distinct blotches, separated darker areas and powdered with both cream and dark dots, giving a rather confused pattern; in females, pattern less contrasted, in shades of ochre or yellowhish-brown with more or less brown subrectangular dorsolateral blotches, often with broad darker edges and a wide lighter centre, producing a “saddle-like” pattern; males have a more complex pattern, but are especially much darker than females; (2) a distinctly projected and raised snout, strongly obliquely truncated when seen from the side, subrectangular seen from above; (3) internasals projected, strongly spatulate and bilobate, distinctly upturned; (4) 19 or usually 21 (rarely 20) DSR at midbody; (5) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (6) 2nd supralabials bordering the whole of the anterior margin of the loreal pit; (7) 1 to 3 moderate, narrow supraoculars, usually flat, rarely convex; (8) VEN: 149–166, SC: 41–67; (9) occipital and temporal scales distinctly keeled in both sexes in adults, less so in juvenile specimens; (10) IL of the first pair not in contact each with the other; (11) hemipenes short, reaching 11th SC, entirely spinose; and (12) adult females usually light colored [from DAVID et al. 2006].
Craspedocephalus brongersmai	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus, endemic to islands off the west coast of Sumatra Island, characterized by the combination of the following characters: (1) in both sexes, an overall brown coloration, with 25–30 darker crossbands, made of a dark background colour in various shades of dark greyish-brown, with short, irregular, elongated darker dorsolateral blotches, lighter in their centre and darker on their edges, with below a smaller subrectangular or subtriangular dark greyish-brown blotche of same colour; between the blotches, the background colour is heavily spotted with dark dots; a row of large, subrectangular blotches on the ventral tips and 1st–2nd DSR, with cream blotches in between; (2) a distinctly projected and raised snout, strongly obliquely truncated when seen from the side, subrectangular seen from above; (3) internasals projected, strongly spatulate and bilobate, laterally expanded; (4) 19 or 21 MSR, distinctly keeled; (5) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (6) 2nd supralabials bordering the whole of the anterior margin of the loreal pit; (7) 4 or 5 narrow supraoculars, strongly erect and divergent; (8) a low number of VEN: 148–149 in males and 129–142 in females; (9) occipital and temporal scales strongly keeled; (10) IL of the first pair not in contact each with the other; and (11) hemipenes short, massive and spiny [from DAVID et al. 2006].
Protobothrops cornutus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description: “Type, a male, probably not full grown. Snout twice as long as the diameter of the eye, which is as long as its distance from the mouth. Rostral broader than high upper head-scales small, a transverse smooth upon the crown, keeled posteriorly, eleven in series between the supraoculars, which are broken up into three or four scales ; these are strongly erect and together form a horn-like appendage; internasals slightly raised at their outer margins, separated from one another by two or three scales. Nine supralabials, the second forming the anterior border of the loreal pit, the third the largest, the fourth immediately below the eye, separated from it by three rows of small scales, the upper one of which (subocular) is elongate; three or four postoculars ; temporals small, keeled thirteen or fourteen infralabials; a single pair of elongated sublinguals. Scales in 21. 21. 17 rows, keeled ; ventrals 193; anal single; subcaudals 68 pairs, tail, not quite complete, slightly prehensile. Greyish brown above, with two more or less distinct dorsal series of squarish darker spots, edged with blackish, which usually meet on the vertebral line and form cross-bars; occasionally they alternate; a lateral series of whitish spots. Below whitish, thickly powdered with brown. Head with small, irregular, brown spots. Total length 587 ; tail 107 mm.” (Smith 1930)Drawing (head): Smith 1930: 682
Trimeresurus erythrurus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 23–25 longitudinal rows at midbody; first upper labial partially or completely fused to nasal; 9–13 upper labials, 1–2 rows of scales separate upper labials from subocular; 11–14 scales in a line between supraoculars; supraoculars rarely divided; temporal scales small, strongly keeled; ventrals: males 153–174, females: 151–180; subcaudals: males 62–79, females 49–61, usually paired, occasionally unpaired shields present among paired series; head uniform green, dorsum bright green, light ventrolateral stripe present in males, present or absent in females (Maslin [1942:23] says that the ventrolateral stripe is absent, but Smith [1943:524] states that it is present in males and variable in females), tail spotted with brown; hemipenes without spines. Total length males 575 mm, females 1045; tail length males 120 mm, females 165 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Trimeresurus flavomaculatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DESCRIPTION. Scales on head and chin smooth or irregularly keeled; second upper labial fused to scale forming forming anterior border of facial pit; body scales in 21 longitudinal rows around midbody, 29 rows around neck; a distinct light stripe, or at least a series of light spots, pres- ent along outer scale row; dorsal color highly variable, with dark pigments present, usally blue green, green, or dark blue gray, sometimes as scattered, irregular spots or blothches, also as distinct crossbars; tail not distinctly differentiated from body by color; hemipenes without spines; ventrals 170-182 (males 170-178, females 177-1820, subcaudals 58-71 (males 62-71, females 58-63) (from Leviton et al. 2014: 517).
Craspedocephalus gramineus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis. A cryptic lineage (L1) belonging to the C. gramineus complex, it is distinguished from C. occidentalis (L2) as follows: lower ventral scale count 158–179 (vs.142–154). It is genetically divergent from C. occidentalis by 8.1 % and 1.0 % at cyt b and 16S respectively. This lineage is far more widespread than its parapatric sister taxon C. occidentalis, occuring almost throughout peninsular India from Odisha in the east, southern Gujarat to the north-west and as far south as the Srivilliputhur hills (Mallik et al. 2021).Description of referred material (n=11). A species with a slender, cylindrical body of snout to vent length (SVL) up to 679 mm and a prehensile tail; dorsal scales keeled with anterior dorsal scale rows (DSR) 19–21, mid body scale rows (MSR) 19–21 and posterior scale rows (PSR) 15; head prominent, clearly distinguished from the neck with small, juxtaposed scales on the head; rostral scale sub triangular with the upper side roughly one fourth the size of the lower side with the tip visible from above; supraoculars separated by 8–11 scales, between the posterior edge of the supraocular scales; canthus rostralis distinct with three to four canthal scales on the ridge; two to three preoculars, two to three postoculars and a thin elongated crescent shaped subocular; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil; temporal scales mildly keeled; aperture of the nostril completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and subrectangular; nasal scale bordering the first supralabial; loreal pit present in contact with the second supralabial with two scales between the nasal and the second supralabial; 10–12 supralabials and 11–13 infralabials, with 9–13 scales between the last supralabial, including the last supralabial up to the start of the ventral scales; ventrals 158–179, laterally separated from the dorsal scale rows by a slightly broader row of dorsal scales anal scale undivided, divided subcaudals 54–67; terminal scale on the tail larger than the previous scale, blunt at the tip (Mallik et al. 2021).Colour in life. Head and dorsum colour from verdant green to leaf green, sometimes bluish green with black, alternating saddle shaped markings on the dorsum; preocular/ temporal stripe in black, sometimes green fading into black; ventrals with bright yellow, creamish yellow to a dirty white colour; the region where the ventrals meet the dorsum alternating with the ventral colour once every 2–3 scales (Mallik et al. 2021).Craspedocephalus (Trimeresurus in my 2004 paper): possession of hemipenis with intermediate length lobes, covered to the tip with numerous long thin spines.
Trimeresurus hageni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A large species of pitviper of the genus Trimeresurus (subgenus Parias Gray, 1849), characterized by the combination of (1) body elongate, head long and massive in adults; (2) body deep green or dark green in life, without sexual dimorphism in colouration and pattern; (3) on each side, a series of dorsolateral spots, white or pink, irregular in shape and size, usually conspicuous; (4) a broad, pale ventrolateral stripe on first two dorsal scale rows; (5) 21 (in a sole specimen 23) DSR at midbody; (6) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal scale; (7) large internasals, most usually in contact, only exceptionally separated by 1 scale (6 out of 42 specimens); (8) 1 or 2 (3rd or 3rd–4th SL), rarely 3 supralabials (3rd–4th–5th SL) in contact with subocular, (9) supraoculars elongate, not distinctly broad, separated by 5–9 (usually 6–7) scales; (10) tail average, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.190 and 0.225 in males and 0.143 and 0.185 in females, with a clear sexual dimorphism; (11) 176–196 VEN; (10) 59–91 SC (males: 72–91; females: 59–78); (12) in life, eye dark grey pale yellow or yellowish-green; (13) a narrow postocular streak, white, cream, pale yellow, uniform or mixed with reddish-brown or salmon (pink or cream in preservative) usually present in males, present or absent in females; (14) venter yellowish-green or pale green, without any black margins; and (16) tail green as the body anteriorly, with large pinkish-red, salmon or red blotches (cream in preservative) on the upper surface of its anterior half, becoming fused and turning the tail entirely into hues of red on its posterior half. Characters separating T. hageni from the three new species described by Vogel et al. 2022 and from T. sumatranus and T. gunaleni are summarized in Table 1 in Vogel et al. 2022.Redescription of the lectotype. Rostral barely visible from above, triangular, about as high as broad; nasals pentagonal, large, elongate, entire with elements of a very shallow furrow barely visible; 2 internasals, trapezium-like, large, laterally elongate, about 1.5 times wider than long, broadly in contact each with the other; each internasal followed by small, irregular snout scales, not enlarged; scales on upper snout surface smooth, juxtaposed or barely imbricate, subrectangular, with 4 scales along a longitudinal line extending from the internasals to a line connecting the anterior margins of eyes; 2/2 canthal scales bordering the canthus rostralis between internasal and corresponding supraocular, not larger than adjacent snout scales; on each side, 1 elongate, triangular loreal scale between nasal and the upper preocular; 2/2 preoculars above the loreal pit, the upper one visible from above, both scales elongate and in contact with loreal; lower preocular forming the lower margin of loreal pit; 1/1 thin, elongate subocular; 2/2 small postoculars; 1/1 supraocular, elongate, rather irregularly shaped, 2.8/2.9 times as long as wide, about 0.8 times as wide as internasal, distinctly indented by upper head scales; 7 cephalic scales on a line between the middle of supraoculars, smooth, flat and juxtaposed; occipital scales flat, smooth, imbricate; temporal scales in 2 or 3 rows, smooth, lower ones much enlarged; 10/10 SL, 1st SL triangular, rather short, completely separated from the nasal; 2nd SL tall, bordering entirely the loreal pit and anteriorly in contact with nasal; 3rd SL longest and highest, about 1.1 times longer than high, in contact on both sides with subocular; 4th SL as high as 3rd SL but not as long, in contact with the subocular on both sides; 5th SL much shorter (0.6 times) than 4th one, separated from the subocular by 1 scale on both sides; 14/14 infralabials, those of the first pair longitudinally in contact, 1st–3rd IL in contact with anterior chin shields; 3 or 4 rows of smooth gular scales; throat shields irregularly arranged. Body elongate, laterally compressed; head elongate, flattened, relatively narrow seen from above, massive and thick seen from the side, distinctly triangular, wide at its base, clearly distinct from the neck, 1.7 times as long as wide; snout quite long, rounded when seen from above, obliquely truncated when seen from the side, with a moderate canthus rostralis, amounting for 25.5 % of head length and 2.4 times as long as diameter of eye; a large, oval nostril piercing in the middle of nasal scale; nostril-loreal pit distance about 0.5 times the distance between the nostril and the eye; eye average, amounting for 0.6 times the distance between the lower margin of eye and upper lip border; tail, tapering and prehensile. SVL 831 mm, TaL 140 mm, TL 971 mm; ratio TaL/TL 0.144. DSR: 21-21-15 scales, rhomboid, moderately and narrowly keeled with the exception of scales of 1st dorsal scale row which are smooth and not enlarged; 186 ventrals (+ 0 preventral); 60 subcaudals, all paired; anal entire. (Vogel et al. 2022)Coloration (lectotype). The head is uniform brown as the anterior part of the body above and on the upper temporal region, bluish green above the snout and lower temporals; on each side, a cream, oblique temporal streak extends from the eye to the corner of the mouth on the 3rd and 2nd rows of temporals behind the eye then on 2nd row only; supralabials pale bluish-green, distinctly paler than upper head surface, without darker edges; preoculars brown mixed with bluish-green. Chin, throat and infralabials uniform bluish green, with some faint darker spots posteriorly. The body is bluish-green on the lower part of the sides, i.e. on 1st–4th DSR, becoming quickly darker, dark greyish- or greenish-blue above 4th DSR, but this colour turns into pale brown or bluish-brown on the two anterior thirds of the body; on each side, a series of irregularly rounded, cream blotches on 5th–6th DSR, visible only on the posterior half of the body, more or less widely separated each from the other by 5 to 18 scale rows; a cream, conspicuous ventrolateral stripe covering much of 1st DSR and the lower half of 2nd DSR, extending from neck up to vent. The tail is dark greyish blue on its immediate anterior part then covered with four wide and broad, cream blotches covering both the sides and the upper part of the tail; the ventrolateral stripe of the body extends for a short length on the lower sides of tail; posteriorly, the tail is entirely cream. The venter is uniform pale bluish green; subcaudals not edged with a darker hue; the tail is uniform pale bluish green on its anterior part then quickly turns to cream.” (Vogel et al. 2022)Species description and variation. According to Brongersma (1933a), Tweedie (1983), Sanders et al. (2002), Gumprecht et al. (2003, 2004) and our material, this large species reaches a maximum total length of 1,230 mm. Gumprecht et al. (2003) mentioned a total length of 1,400 mm but we could not find such a large specimen. Males are seemingly shorter, the longest male seen by us being only 956 mm long. Adults usually reach a maximum total length of 750–1,050 mm. Rostral barely visible from above, triangular, about as high as broad; nasals subrectangular or pentagonal, entire or with traces of a shallow furrow; 1 large internasal on each side, subrectangular or trapezium-like, laterally elongate, 1.2–1.5 times wider than long; internasals usually in contact (in 65/72 examined specimens) or separated by 1 small scale (7/72); internasals followed by upper snout scales, irregular, distinctly enlarged, smooth, juxtaposed or barely imbricate, subrectangular, with 4–5 scales along a longitudinal line extending from the internasals to a line connecting the anterior margins of the eyes; 2 (rarely 3) canthal scales bordering the canthus rostralis of similar size; 2 (exceptionally 3) postoculars on each side; 1 large, elongate supraocular on each side, 2.2–2.6 times as long as wide, 0.7–1.0 times as wide as internasal, not indented by adjacent cephalic scales; 5–9 (usually 6–7) cephalic scales on a line between supraoculars, smooth, flat and juxtaposed or barely imbricate; occipital scales larger than cephalic scales, smooth; temporal scales smooth, large, subequal, in 2 rows anteriorly, 3 rows posteriorly; 9–13 (usually 10 or 11 ) supralabials; 1st SL always separated from nasal; 2nd SL tall, entirely bordering the anterior margin of the loreal pit, always in contact with nasal; 3rd SL longest and highest, elongate, 1.2–1.5 times as long as high, usually in contact with subocular, separated by 1 scale in 14/144 occurrences; 4th SL as long as high, as high or barely shorter than 3rd SL, either in contact with subocular (in 60/144 occurrences) or separated by 1 small scale (in 84/144 occurrences); 5th SL usually separated from subocular by 1 scale, rarely in contact (in 18/144 occurrences); 11–15 (usually 12–13; 16 IL in one specimen) IL; scales of the 1st pair longitudinally in contact or barely separated by the apex of the long mental scale; first three pairs of infralabials in contact with anterior chin shields; 3–6 rows of smooth gular scales; throat shields irregularly arranged. The body is robust but elongate in both males and females, or slightly thinner in males. In adults, the snout is 24.0–26.0% as long as head or 2.0–2.6 times as long as diameter of the eye. Eye large in males and juvenile specimens, average in females but rather protruding laterally, amounting for 0.6–0.9 times the distance eye–lower edge of the lip in both sexes. Ratio TaL/TL: 0.143–0.225, with a clear sexual dimorphism: males: 0.190–0.225; females: 0.143–0.185. DSR: 21–23 (exceptionally 20 or 23) -21 (exceptionally 23) -15 (exceptionally 14 or 17); scales moderately keeled, smooth on 1st DSR; VEN: 176–196 (plus 0–2 preventrals); SC: 59–91, all paired, with a sexual dimorphism (males: 72–91; females: 59–78); anal entire. In our sample of 72 specimens, we examined only one specimen with 23 DSR at midbody; its dorsal scale formula is 25–23–17 (RMNH 7589). In our material, one specimen has 14 scale rows before vent, three have 17 rows.” (Vogel et al. 2022)Coloration: In life, adult specimens are pale green, bright green, grass green, dark yellowish green or olive green (deep green, bluish green or dark brown in preservative) above and on the sides, either more or less uniform, although slightly or barely paler on the lower part of the sides, or with more conspicuous paler areas, often triangular in shape with apex pointing upwards up to 4th–6th DSR, separated by areas of a darker green hue, producing a faint banded pattern; scales of the body not edged with black; interstitial skin dark grey; on each side, a series of large, more or less rounded or vertically elongate dorsolateral blotches, white, cream, pink or salmon (white or cream in preservative) on 5th–8th DSR, about 1 to 1.5 dorsal scale long and 1.5 to 2.5 scales high, longitudinally separated by 2 to 4 dorsal scales, usually more or less set off from each other on each side across vertebral line; these blotches are sometimes poorly defined or present only on the posterior half of the body; a conspicuous, broad, white, cream or pale yellow ventrolateral stripe extending from the base of the neck to the vent on the whole or greatest part of scales of the 1st DSR and on the lower part of 2nd DSR; sometimes, some irregular black spots on the anterior margin of scales of the 1st DSR, making the ventrolateral stripe broken. The background colour of the tail is of the same green as the upper body; 5 to 8 large, pinkish-red, salmon or red blotches (cream in preservative) on the upper and lateral surface of its anterior half, forming incomplete rings, becoming progressively wider and fused, and turning entirely the tail into these hues of red on its posterior half, marked with irregular paler areas of the same colour than the under surface of the tail; the ventrolateral pale stripe of the body extends along the anterior half of the tail. The upper snout and head surfaces and upper temporal regions are in the same hues of green as the body; snout and cephalic scales uniform or, rarely, narrowly edged with black; rostral, sides of the snout, supralabials and lower temporal regions are pale green, pale greenish yellow, or, often, pale blue or greenish-blue, distinctly paler than the upper head surface, without dark edges; upper snout scales, preoculars, loreals and supraoculars sometimes marbled with yellowish-ochre or pale yellowish-brown; a narrow temporal streak, more or less well-defined, sometimes faint, rather straight or barely oblique, white, cream, pale yellow, uniform or mixed with reddish-brown or salmon, or entirely reddish-brown, (pink or cream in preservative), extends from the eye to the corner of the mouth on the 3rd row of temporals behind the eye then on 2nd row only posteriorly; this postocular streak is present in 28 out of 30 males and 31 out of 72 females. The chin and throat are pale yellow or creamish-yellow, pale yellowish-green or, often, very pale blue or pale bluish green, with some faint darker spots posteriorly; infralabials green or distinctly pale blue. In life, the eye is dark grey, pale yellow or yellowish green. The venter is pale green, pale bluish green, pale greenish yellow or yellowish green in life (green, yellowish green or bluish green in preservative), without any black margin on ventrals. The under surface of the tail is of the same colours as the body on its anterior part, with subcaudal scales not edged with a darker hue, then quickly turns to pale pinkish-red or salmon (cream in preservative), distinctly paler than on its upper surface. Juveniles show a very similar pattern. The dorsum is usually more uniform than in adults and the pale dorsolateral spots or blotches may be missing. The pink or salmon colour of the tail is brighter than in adults but less uniform, with darker spots.” (Vogel et al. 2022)
Trimeresurus kanburiensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: for a table of diagnostic characters distinguishing T. kuiburi from T. kanburiensis and T. venustus, see Sumontha et al. 2021: 322 (Tabl 4).
Craspedocephalus macrolepis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus Peltopelor): a combination of a long calyculate hemipenis and enlarged head scalesDescription: “Snout twice as long as the diameter of the eye. Upper head scales very large, smooth, strongly imbricate; supraoculars very large, separated from one another by a single large scale, rarely with a small one on either side of it : internasals large, in contact with one another or separated by a single scale 7-8 supralabials, the first completely separated from the nasal, -the third largest a single series of scales between the labials and the elongate subocular 2 rows of large temporal scales, smooth or feebly keeled.Scales in 17: 12 to 15:9 or 10 rows, strongly imbricate and keeled; the median 10 rows are the largest, and this number is constant, the additional rows being made up by smaller •scales which are not constant in number an even number of scale-rows is frequent. V. male 133-140, female 135-143 ; C. male 53-56; female 44-58, paired; tail prehensile.Hemipenis extending to the 20th-21st caudal plate, forked opposite the 5th, calculate throughout, the calyces becoming smaller as the proximal part of the organ is reached ; sulcus prominent throughout. There are no spines. Coloration: Bright green above, paler beneath ; the interstitial skin and under surface of the scales blackish a whitish or yellow line along scale-row 1 ; a black postocular stripe present or absent upper lip pale green.Total length : male 475, tail 110; female 580, tail 115 mm.” (Smith 1943: 505)
Trimeresurus macrops	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Cryptelytrops macrops s.s. is distinguished from all other Asian pitviper species which also have the typical "green pitviper" colouration (uniform green dorsal colour and a lateral stripe present on the first few dorsal scale rows in one or both sexes), except other species of Cryptelytrops, by the presence of a fused first supralabial and nasal scale. It can be distinguished from C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis primarily by the relatively larger size of the eye (most obvious in adults), the relatively wider supraoculars, and the shape of the head, which is more elongate–oval in C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis, but widens quite abruptly behind the eyes in C. cardamomensis sp. nov., C. macrops s.s. and C. rubeus sp. nov. to give a character- istically triangular shaped head. Cryptelytrops macrops s.s. can be distinguished from both C. cardamomensis sp. nov. and C. rubeus sp. nov using the characters detailed above (further details are also given in Tables 2 and 3) [from MALHOTRA et al. 2011].
Craspedocephalus malabaricus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis. A lineage of the C. malabaricus complex, C. malabaricus s. str. (L5) is here restricted only to populations north of the Palghat Gap. This nominotypical population is 8.3–9% and 1.2– 2.2% divergent at cyt b and 16S respectively, from those south of the Palghat Gap (L3 & L4), recognised here as two nominate taxa: C. anamallensis (Günther, 1864) and Craspedocephalus travancoricus sp. nov. (see below). These taxa are allopatric with respect to each other and C. malabaricus (Mallik et al. 2021).Description. Neotype in good condition, small lesion near the nape, possibly caused while collecting and euthanizing the individual; specimen with a slender, cylindrical body of snout to vent length (SVL) 481 mm and a prehensile tail of length (TL) 73 mm; dorsal scales keeled with anterior dorsal scale rows (DSR) 21, mid body scale rows (MSR) 21 and posterior scale rows (PSR) 13; head prominent, of length 24.3 mm, clearly distinguished from the neck with small, mildly keeled scales on the head; rostral scale trapezoid, with the lower side roughly more than twice the size of the upper side with the tip visible from above; supraoculars divided, separated by eight cephalic scales between both supraoculars at its posterior border; seven scales bordering each supraocular. Canthus rostralis distinct with four canthal scales; three preoculars, two postoculars and a thin elongated crescent shaped subocular; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil, vertical diameter of the eye 3.31 mm and horizontal diameter 3.68 mm; strongly keeled temporal scales and cephalic scales in the posterior sides above the mandibular joint; aperture of the nostril completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and sub-pentagonal shaped, in contact with the first two canthal scales and the 1st and 2nd supralabial; loreal pit present in contact with the second supralabial and the 2nd and 3rd preoculars; nine supralabials and 12 infralabials, with eight scales between the last supralabial, including the last supralabial up to the start of the ventral scales; 1st, 2nd and 3rd infralabial scale in contact with the first pair of genials; a gap of four scales including the posterior genials followed by 148 ventrals, laterally separated from the dorsal scale rows by a slightly broader row of dorsal scales; anal scale undivided, followed by 38 divided subcaudals scales; Terminal scale on the tail larger than the previous scale, blunt at the tip (Mallik et al. 2021).Variation (n=20). The referred materials are of SVL up to 670 mm and TL up to 126 mm with colours varying from dark brownish red to light green throughout the specimens in its current preservation state, differs from the holotype with respect to pholidosis by having 19 to 22 DSR, 19 to 23 MSR, 13 to15 PSR, 145–149 ventrals and 52–54 subcaudals; head distinct with supralabials ranging between 8–10 and infralabials ranging between 10–13; one to three preocular scales, one to two scales (some specimens showing an absence of these scales) between the 3rd supralabial scale and the suboculars, seven to nine cephalic scales and seven to eight scales surrounding the supraoculars from the dorsum (Mallik et al. 2021).Colour in life. A highly variable and polymorphic species, with respect to colour, specimens can be found in a variety of colour morphs greenish blue-cyan, bright yellow, green, rufous brown, bright orange and red coloured specimens have been encountered during this study; head characterized with a thick dark brown to black postocular stripe till the nape, labials sometimes marked with blotches and a highly variable pattern above the head, sometimes fully dark, some individuals with no markings at all, body with alternating zig-zag saddle shaped markings with the last rows of scales on the tail banded with different colour; these markings vary from brick reddish, dark brown to black, sometimes intermixed with spots of other colours such as green, yellow and blue; the base colour of the body varies from light brown in juveniles, light cream, orange, yellow, brick red, bluish green and sometimes morphs mottled with all or some of the aforementioned colours; ventrals sometimes vary from the colour of the dorsum, complementing the variety of vibrant dorsal colours, but often are coloured similar to the dorsum; colour change is also observed to be seasonal (Kanagavel et al. 2012); juveniles brown with dark brown to black markings, neonates and younger juveniles possess a tail ‘lure’ that is often different from the body’s colouration. Mandibular region and the ventrals in alternating light green, blue, yellow to creamy yellow with speckles, separated from the dorsal scales with a longitudinal lighter irregular stripe, two prominent, labial stripes from the eye and the loreal pit, up to the edge of the lower end of the supralabial region (Mallik et al. 2021).
Trimeresurus medoensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 17 longitudinal rows at midbody, dorsal rows 7–11 slightly keeled; 8 upper labials, first upper labials separated from nasals by a distinct suture; green or bluish green above, yellowish white below, the two separated by a bright bicolored red (below) and white (above) ventrolateral stripe (in both males and females), which occupies the whole of the outermost scale row and a portion of the second row; ventrals less than 150; hemipenes short, thick, spinose. Total length males 671 mm, females 650; tail length males 125 mm, females 115 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Trimeresurus sabahi	Serpentes	Viperidae	For abbreviations see T. nebularis.Diagnosis (sabahi): A species of the genus Trimeresurus, endemic to Borneo Island, charac-terized by the following points: (1) hemipenes long, smooth, without spines; (2) 1 st supralabial distinct from nasal; (3) 21 DSR at midbody, moderately keeled; (4) overall green coloration in males and females, without crossbands; (5) postocular streak absent in males and females; (6) a bicolor ventrolateral stripe present in males, red or rusty-red below, white above; in females, the stripe is white of yellow; (7) eyes bright or deep red or deep orange in males and females, orange, yellowish-copper or yellowish-green in juve-nile specimens; (8) tail sides green, widely mottled with rusty brown, with a sharp border between the colours; (9) tail long in males and females, with a ratio TaL/TL of 0.186– 0.238, and 0.173–0.178 respectively; (10) VEN: 147–157; SC: 59–76; (11) Occipital and temporal scales smooth or very weakly keeled [VOGEL et al. 2004].Diagnosis (barati): A species of the genus Trimeresurus, endemic to Sumatra Island, char-acterized by the following points: (1) hemipenes long, smooth, without spines; (2) 1 st supralabial distinct from nasal; (3) 19 MSR (rarely 17); (4) overall green coloration in males and females, without crossbands; (5) postocular streak absent in males and females; (6) in males a ventrolateral stripe, reddish-brown below / white above, absent in females; (7) tail green, rusty-red above, slightly mottled with green laterally but with a definite bor-der between the red and green colours; (8) VEN: 142–158; SC: 55–73; (8) tail long in males, with a ratio TaL/TL of 0.194–0.231, and in females, 0.164–0.176 [VOGEL et al. 2004]Comparisons: Trimeresurus barati differs from all other pitvi-pers of the Trimeresurus popeiorum complex by the combination of the following charac-ters: (1) the number of MSR, usually 19; (2) tail with a definite border between the red and green colours; (3) postocular streak absent in males and females; (4) a weak ventrolateral stripe, bicolor reddish-brown below and white above or only white in males, absent in females; (5) a smaller size; (6) a low number of VEN in males and females; (7) occipital and temporal scales smooth or weakly keeled; (8) the pattern of the tail. Main characters separating Trimeresurus barati from other species of the group are given in Tables 12–13. From T. popeiorum, it differs by: (1) a smaller size; (2) the lack of postocular streak in males; (3) the lack of ventrolateral stripe in females; (4) the number of MSR; (5) a lower number of ventrals in females (146–158 vs. 154–168 in T. popeiorum); (6) occipital and temporal scales much more weakly keeled; (7) by the higher value for TaL/TL in males, although with a wide overlap in the ranges (see Table 12); (8) the pattern of the tail. Trimeresurus barati differs from Trimeresurus fucatus by (1) a smaller size in T. barati; (2) the number of MSR (17–19 vs. 21 in T. fucatus); (3) the lack of dorsal cross-bands in T. barati; (4) the lack of a ventrolateral stripe in females of T. barat i; (6) the pat-tern of the tail; (7) by a higher number of VEN in both sexes of T. f ucat us (males: 156–171 727 [x = 164.0, s = 3.5] vs. in T. barati 142–153 [x = 148.3, s = 3.3]; in females: 157–170 in T. fucatus [x = 163.5, s = 3.4] vs. in T. barati 146–158 [x = 149.8, s = 4.3]); (8) a higher num-ber of SC in males and especially in females of T. f ucat us (59–73 [x = 63.8, s = 3.6] vs. in T. barati 55–59 [x = 57.2, s = 1.6]); (9) occipital and temporal scales much more weakly keeled or smooth in T. barati; (10) the pattern of the tail. Trimeresurus barati differs from T. sabahi by: (1) the number of MSR; (2) a smaller size; (3) the presence of a white or yellow ventrolateral stripe in females of T. sabahi, absent in T. barat i; (4) the colour of the eyes, orange or yellow in T. barati vs. red or orange-red in T. sabahi; (5) a slightly lower ratio TaL/TL in females (0.164–0.176 [x = 0.172, s = 0.005] vs. 0.173–0.178 [x = 0.176, s = 0.003] in T. sabahi; U = 1; P < 0.05); (6) a lower number of SC in females (55–59 [x = 57.2, s = 1.5] vs. 59–65 [x = 62.2, s = 2.7] in T. sabahi); (7) by the contact of the 3 rd SL with the SubOC, usually in contact in both sexes of T. barati (in 31/34 total occurrences [left + right sides], vs. in contact in only 8/20 occurrences in T. sabahi and separated by 1 scale in the three examined females; (8) the pattern of the tail.Diagnosis (buniana): Popeia buniana is significantly different (p<0.008) from all other species of the popeiorum complex by having more ventral scales (170–174, x=171.8; sd=2.06); the facial pit being closer to the eye (DETP/DETN: 0.22–0.33, x=0.28, sd=0.027); and having a relatively thinner internasal scale (WInN/WsupOc: 0.9–1.2, x=1.08, sd=0.06). Male P. buniana differ from male P. barati, P. popeiorum, and P. sabahi in having significantly fewer subcaudal scales (76–78, x=77.3, sd=1.62). Male P. buniana have a significantly shorter head (HL/SVL; 0.44–0.47, x=0.46, sd=0.023) than that of male P. barati or P. nebularis and they have a significantly longer tail (Tal/TL: 0.22–0.23, x=0.22, sd=0.006) than that of male P. nebularis and P. popeiorum. Male P. buniana differ from male P. barati, P. nebularis, and P. sabahi in having a postorbital stripe as opposed to lacking a stripe; from P. fucata in lacking white, vertebral spots as opposed to having spots; and from P. nebularis in having a bicolored, ventrolateral stripe as opposed to having a white or blue stripe. Female P. buniana differ from female P. barati and P. nebularis in having a white, ventrolateral stripe as opposed to not having stripes. Popeia buniana differs from P. popeiorum in that the ventrolateral stripe covers 50% of the scale in the first dorsal scale row as opposed to covering 100% of the scale [from GRISMER et al. 2006].Diagnosis (fucatus). A species of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by (1) hemipenes long, reaching at least 25 th SC, without spines; (2) 1 st supralabial distinct from nasal; (3) 21 MSR (20 in 1 specimen); (4) overall green coloration in males and females; (5) irregular rusty or reddish-brown dorsal crossbands in most males; (6) a vertebral row of white dots in males, especially those from southern Thailand and Pulau Tioman, conspicuous in life (often invisible in preserved specimens or in living old specimens), present also in females, especially in juvenile specimens from same areas; (7) in males, a postocular streak usually thin, irregular, either entirely white or white below with an irregular, dark red or rusty brown streak above, sometimes totally absent (this streak is often much sub-dued and invisible in preservative); this streak is absent in females, but some white spots may be present; (8) eyes yellowish-green, greenish-gold or yellow-copper in both sexes in adult specimens; (9) in males, a vivid, bicolor ventrolateral stripe, bright and deep orange or red below, white above; in females, a thin, white but well defined stripe; (10) a tail entirely rusty brown or reddish-brown in the northern part of the range, mottled in the southern part; (11) a long tail in males, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.200 and more than 0.240; (12) a high number of SC in males (at least 69); (13) occipital and temporal scales distinctly keeled; (14) an elongated snout, oblically truncated (from VOGEL et al. 2004).Comparison. Main characters separating Trimeresurus fucatus from other taxa of the group are given in Tables 12–13. Trimeresurus fucatus differs from its “northern” relative Trimeresurus popeiorum by (1) the presence of dorsal crossbands in males of most populations; (2) the colour of the tail (see the description) in the northern populations; (3) the colour of the eyes: green or greenish-gold or copper in T. f ucatus, vs. deep red in T. popeiorum; (4) the postocular streak in males, in T. fucat us sometimes absent, or white, or white with a dark red upper part (see Vogel [1990]) vs. always wide and vividly bicolor in T. popeiorum; (5) the postocular streak in females, lacking in females of T. fucatus, faint but present in T. popeiorum; (6) a higher value of TaL/TL in males (0.201–0.241 [x = 0.218, s = 0.001] vs. in T. popeiorum 0.181–0.211 [x = 0.195, s = 0.009]; U = 4.5, P < 0.001); (7) a higher number of SC in males (69–84 [x = 75.9, s = 3.5] vs. 59–75 [x = 68.1, s = 4.2] in T. popeiorum; U = 58, P < 0.001); (8) a more elongated, flattened head and oblically truncated snout; (9) a slightly smaller size in T. fucatus compared to T. popeiorum. Trimeresurus fucatus differs from the Sundaic species of the complex (see below) by (1) the presence of dorsal crossbands in most males; (2) the presence of a conspicuous white ventrolateral stripe in females (also present in Trimeresurus sabahi); (3) the pres-ence of dorsal white spots in many specimens of T. fucatus, although, according to Stuebing & Inger (1999), white dots are sometimes present in Trimeresurus sabahi; (4) higher numbers of ventral scales in males and in females; (5) occipital and temporal scales strongly keeled in T. fucatus, smooth or much more weakly keeled in Sundaic species (from VOGEL et al. 2004). Diagnosis (toba): A species of the genus Trimeresurus Lacépède, 1804, characterized by (1) hemipenes long, reaching in situ at least the 25th sC, without spines; (2) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (3) 21 msr; (4) overall green coloration in males and females without darker crossbands; (5) absence of a postocular streak in both males and females; (6) thin, white ventrolateral stripe present in males, faint but present or absent in females; (7) rather short tail in females with a ratio taL/tL between 0.148 and 0.157; (8) occipital scales smooth or weakly keeled; and (9) temporal scales large, as large as posterior temporals.Comparisons: Trimeresurus sabahi differs from all other pitvi-pers of the Trimeresurus popeiorum complex mostly by the combination of the following characters:(1) the eye colour, red or orange-red in both males and females; (2) no postocu-lar streak in males and females; (4) a bicolor ventrolateral stripe in males, red below/white above, only white or yellow in females; (5) a low ventral count in males and females; (6) occipital and temporal scales smooth or very weakly keeled. Main characters separating Trimeresurus sabahi from other taxa of the group are given in Tables 12–13. T. sabahi differs from T. popeiorum by (1) a smaller size; (2) by the absence of postocular streaks in both sexes; (3) a lower number of Cep between the supraoculars (9–11 [x = 10.3, s = 0.8] vs. in T. popeiorum 10–14 [x = 11.5, s = 1.0]; U = 45.5; P < 0.05)]); (4) a lower number of VEN in females (148–156 vs. 154–168 in T. popeiorum); (5) occipital and temporal scales smooth, vs. distinctly or strongly keeled in T. popeiorum. Trimeresurus sabahi differs from T. fucatus by (1) a smaller size; (2) the absence of dorsal crossbands in T. sabahi; (3) the colour of the eyes in males and females (red in T.  sabahi vs. yellowish-green or gold or copper in T. fucat us); (4) the absence of vertebral white spots in T. sabahi, although, according to Stuebing & Inger (1999), white dots are sometimes present; (5) the tail pattern; (6) a higher number of ventral scales in both sexes of T. f ucat us (in males 156–171 [x = 164.0, s = 3.5] vs. 147–157 [x = 151.6, s = 2.8] in T. sabahi; U = 1.5; P < 0.001; in females 157–170 [x = 163.5, s = 3.4] vs. in T. sabahi 148– 156 [x = 152.2, s = 3.0]); (7) by weakly keeled or smooth occipital and temporal scales in T. sabahi, strongly keeled in T. f ucatus.
Craspedocephalus puniceus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus from Java Island and South Sumatra, characterized by the combination of the following characters: (1) an overall grey or brown pattern with 20–30 darker crossbands, distinctly related to the sex: in males, background colour in various shades of grey or yellowish-brown, with darker, irregular, constricted, dorsolateral blotches, often heavily powdered with cream and dark dots, giving an “ashy”1293 or lichen-like appearance; in females, pattern much less contrasted in shades of grey or yellowhish-brown with more or less brown subrectangular dorsolateral blotches; males are more brightly colored, with a more complex and contrasted pattern than females, but not overally darker or lighter than females; (2) a distinctly projected and raised snout, strongly obliquely truncated when seen from the side, rounded or subrectangular seen from above; (3) internasals normal or weakly bilobate, either sligthly raised or upturned, or flat; (4) 21 or 23 (rarely 19) DSR at midbody; (5) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (6) 2nd supralabials never bordering the loreal pit, topped by a prefoveal scale; (7) 2–5 small, distinctly raised supraoculars; (8) VEN: 153–167, SC: 41–59; (9) occipital and temporal scales distinctly keeled in both sexes; (10) IL of the first pair not in contact each with the other; (11) hemipenes short, reaching 11–13th SC, nearly entirely spinose [from DAVID et al. 2006].Diagnosis (genus): The current diagnosis of Craspedocephalus may be amended to accommodate the morphological boundaries of the C. macrolepis complex (including some unique features like larger head scales; lower dorsal scale rows count and last costal row being smaller than other scale rows). This includes C. macrolepis and C. peltopelor within the existing boundary of Craspedocephalus (Ashok K. Mallik, pers. comm., 27 Feb 2022).
Trimeresurus purpureomaculatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 25–27 longitudinal rows at midbody; 11–13 upper labials, the first partially or completely united with the nasal; supraocular very narrow, sometimes broken into small scales, 12–15 scales between them; head scales small, subequal, tuberculate or granular; temporal scales keeled; body color highly variable, above olive, grayish, to dark purplish brown, below whitish, greenish or brown, uniform or spotted with brown; a light line on scale row one bordering ventrals present or absent; head olive, heavily suffused with brown; ventrals: males 160–179, females 168–183; subcaudals: males 74–76, females 56–63, paired; hemipenes without spines.Total length males 665 mm, females 900; tail length males 125 mm, females 140 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Trimeresurus schultzei	Serpentes	Viperidae	DESCRIPTION. Scales on head and chin smooth or irregularly keeled; first upper labial separated from nasal by distinct suture; second upper labial fused to scale forming forming anterior border of facial pit; body scales in 21 [rarely 23] longitudinal rows at midbody; ventrals 187–203, subcaudals 66–82; a distinct light stripe, or at least a series of light spots, present along outer scale row; dorsal color greenish-brown to brown or purplish brown with 50–62 indistinct dark bars or zig-zag lines across dorsum, each 2–3 scale rows wide; a distinct yellow line along outer, ventrolateral scale row; ventrals edged with black; tail distinctly differentiated from body by its light color and without dorsal markings; hemipenes spinose (from Leviton et al. 2014: 518).
Trimeresurus stejnegeri	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 21 longitudinal rows at midbody; 9–11 upper labials, first upper labials separated from nasals by a distinct suture; a single narrow supraocular, sometimes divided by transverse suture; 11–16 scales in a line between supraoculars; above bright to dark green, below pale green to whitish, the two separated by a bright bicolored orange or brown (below) and white (above) (males) or bicolored or white only (females) ventrolateral stripe, which occupies the whole of the outermost scale row and a portion of the second row; ventrals 150–174, subcaudals 54–77 (but see David et al. [2002:218 and 2001:215] for geographic distribution of these data), all paired; hemipenes short, spinose beyond bifurcation. Total length 750 mm, tail length 145 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Trimeresurus sumatranus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Taylor 1965: 1070Description: Taylor 1965: 1070
Craspedocephalus trigonocephalus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: “Snout twice as long as the diameter of the eye. Upper head-scales large, unequal, imbricate, smooth supraoculars large, divided into an anterior and a posterior part, the former of which is usually the larger, 3-6 scales on a line between them internasals very large, subquadrangular, in contact with one another 9-10 supralabials, the first completely separated from the nasal, the third largest: a single series of scales between the labials and the elongate subocular; temporal scales small, smooth or obtusely keeled. Scales in 17 or 19 : 17 or 19 : 13 or 15 rows, strongly imbricate, smooth or faintly keeled. V. male 142-157; female 144-160 (170) ; C. male 60-69, female 53-63, paired ; tail prehensile. The last ventral shield is usually notched or divided in two. Hemipenis extending to the 12th caudal plate, forked at the junction of the proximal third and distal two-thirds. The extreme tip and area adjacent to the sulcus are calculate, the remainder spinose, the spines increasing in size as they approach the bifurcation. Green above, uniform or with black, elongated, branching markings, separated from or connected with one another a black temporal streak upper surface of head with or without a network of black lines ventral yellowish uniform or green at the base; end of tail usually black. (Smith 1943: 506)Total length: male 620, tail 110 ; female 835, tail 130 mm. Abercromby records a specimen 4 ft. 4 in. in length (1300 mm.). (Smith 1943: 506)
Trimeresurus yunnanensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS). Scales in 19 (rarely 21) longitudinal rows at midbody and 19(–21) on neck; 9–10 (rarely 11) upper labials, first upper labials separated from nasals by a distinct suture; a single narrow supraocular, sometimes divided by transverse suture; 11–16 scales in a line between supraoculars; above bright to dark green, below pale green to whitish, the two separated by a bicolored orange or brown (below) and white (above) (males) or white only or absent (females) ventrolateral stripe, which occupies the whole of the outermost scale row and a portion of the second row; ventrals 155–165 (–170); subcaudals (58–) 61–68, all paired; hemipenes short, spinose beyond bifurcation. Total length 750 mm, tail length 145 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]
Tropidolaemus huttoni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Original description (type): “Snout sharp, distinctly upturned, its edge continuous with the equally sharp canthus rostralis. Upper head scales unequal subimbricate, some of them obtusely keeled. 10 or 11 in a line between the supraoculars; these are narrow and entire but have their inner margins indented by the adjacent scales; internasals not twice as large as the adjacent scales, separated from one another by two small scales; supralabials, the first entirely separated from the nasal, the third much larger than the others; temporals strongly keeled.Scales in 21: 23: 19 rows, indistinetly keeled on the posterior part of the body: Ventrals 146; anal entire ; subcaudals 52 pairs. Colour Green above, paler on the sides, with a distinct series of dorso-lateral, paired, small, white spots; pale green below; a white temporal streak, edge with red below; it is continued forwards in front of the eve ; tip of snout and end of tail dull red. Total length 138, tail 40 mm. The paratype agrees well with the type. It has a single scale between the internasals; there are 8 scales in line between the supraoculars, ventrals 139 subcauds 49. Total length 139, tail 41 mm. The sharp upturned snout of this new species of viper gives it a resemblance to the Malayan T. borneonsis; in general scalation, except for the separation of the first labial from the nasal, it is related to T. erythrurus.Trimeresurus huttoni is described from two juveniles, both evidently belonging to the same brood. They were captured together in the High Wavy Mountains, Madura District, South India: altitude 5,200 feet. ” (Smith 1949)
Tropidolaemus wagleri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Tropidolaemus, characterized by (1) internasals always in contact; (2) a strong ontogenetic variation of the background body colour: black (never green) in adult females, whereas males and juveniles retain a vividly green background colour; (3) a strong ontogenetic variation of the pattern: yellow crossbands around the body in adult females, white spots in adult and juvenile males, white crossbars in juvenile females; (4) a black postocular stripe in adult females and a white and red one in males and juveniles of both sexes; (5) a banded belly in adult females and a uniform belly in males and juveniles; (6) 21–23 dorsal scale rows at midbody (DSR) at midbody in males and 23–27 in females, usually feebly keeled in males and distinctly keeled in females; (7) 143–152 ventrals (VEN) in males and 134–147 VEN in females; (8) 50–55 subcaudals (SC) in males and 45–54 in females (from VOGEL et al. 2007).Diagnosis (genus): Tropidolaemus is characterized by the absence of a nasal pore, upper surfaces of the snout and head covered with distinctly keeled small scales, strongly keeled gular scales, second supralabial not bordering the anterior margin of the loreal pit and topped by a prefoveal, and a green coloration in juveniles which may or may not change with growth (VOGEL et al. 2007).Original description: “H. Boie Erp. de Java. Col. sumatranus raffles. Seba T.H. [1735, Vol. 2] tab. 68 [LXVIII] fig. 4”. Thus, Boie 1827 doesn’t provide a description but he refers to Seba’s plate which counts as a description.
Vipera ammodytes	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (ammodytes): Cattaneo 2021: 122 (in Italian)Diagnosis (meridionalis): Cattaneo 2021: 122 (in Italian)Diagnosis (buchholzi): this subspecies differs from Vipera ammodytes meridionalis of the mainland and of the other Cycladic islands (namely from the subspecies more similar to it) for distinctive traits of the colouring (in most of the ♂♂ there is a considerable increase of the dark pigments involving both the dorsal and ventral background colour and the pattern with noticeable and rounded spots on the sides; instead the ♀♀ tend toward xanthochroism, highlighted by the very faded ornamentation of the sides) and of the pholidosis [low number of ventral scales (128-138), relatively high number of subcaudals (26-37), high percentage of specimens with 19-20 dorsal scales at mid-trunk (ca. 42%)]. Pholidosis values seem to suggest a reduction in linear size of the trunk and in body volume, in a probable relationship with the diet, headed towards small preys alternative to Podarcis erhardii, lacking both in Paros and Antiparos. (Cattaneo 2021: 137)
Vipera berus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (Pelias): Small and medium snakes, the largest species do not exceed 900 mm in length, including a tail. The head is covered on top by small scales and large regular shaped scutes. The frontal, paired temporal and paired supraorbital scutes are the largest. The nasal scute is separated from the intermaxillar by nasomaxillar scutes. The body scales are strongly costate. The ventral scutes are 128–157, subcaudal 21–46 pairs in two rows and the anal scute is whole. All species are ovoviviparous (Tuniyev et al. 2019: 126)Melanistic morphs in V. berus are common and appear to have some selective advantage, at least in colder climates, hence they are maintained over many decades (Madsen et al. 2022).
Montivipera bornmuelleri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of viper within the Vipera xanthina species-group, characterized by having a much reduced dorsal pattern. This pattern is split up into small irregular bars and blotches, normally between 47 and 64 (^ = 52) on body. In young specimens the pattern is more similar to that in V. xanthina, while the central part of each dorsal blotch fades away during early growth, thus leaving only the dark edges of the blotches left. This results in an irregularly spotted or crossbanded pattern. Belly finely dotted without dark blotches. It is a species of small to medium size, often not exceeding 50 cm length in the wild, but can grow bigger. Midbody scale rows 23 or more rarely 21. Comparatively short tail with only 23 to 26 subcaudals in females and 28 to 31 in males, compared to more than 27 in female xanthina and between 30 and 37 in male xanthina. Further it differs from V. xanthina and V. wagneri in having a lower ventral count (142 to 153, x = 147.8 in females compared to between 148 and 169 in female xanthina and around 161 in female wagneri; and 144 to 152, x = 148.4, in males compared to between 151 and 167 in male xanthina). Vipera bornmuelleri often has three apicals (62 %) in contact with rostral while V. xanthina and V. wagneri has two. Supralabials nine on each side, while V. xanthina regularly has ten. Vipera bornmuelleri differs from V. bulgardaghica by not having the upper preocular in contact with nasal, in having 21 or more scales in first circumocular rings (counted together), and 25 or more in second rings (21 or less in first and 25 or less in second circumocular rings in V. bulgardaghica), and in having 2 scale rows between eye and supralabials (one in V. bulgardaghica). Vipera bornmuelleri is also separated from xanthina and bulgardaghica by having a higher number of intercanthals and inter-supraoculars (42 — 60 counted together, compared to between 30 and 50 in the latter two) (from Nilson & Andrén 1986: 42).
Vipera darevskii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (uzumorum): Small-sized snake, back color is lighter than lateral background. Zigzag has winding, narrow, not interrupted with rounded wings in females, and interrupted with the transversely elongated spots in males. The supralabials are poorly pigmented or not pigmented. There are two (88.2%), rarely one (11.8%) apicals. The vipers of both sexes from Zekeriya differ from all other vipers under comparison by the maximum number of loreals, canthals and apicals, comparatively high number of preventrals and subcaudal shields. Females characterized by a minimal amount of supralabials, and males have the maximum. From above, males are painted in dark grey, whereas the female is reddish-brown in tone; zigzag consists of few transversely elongated spots in males and well-developed scalloped-continuous spots in females. The coloration in general is characterized by smoky figure. Belly is dark-spotted grey in females and almost black in males.Diagnosis (kumlutasi): Small-sized broad-head snake, occupying an intermediate position in a number of characters between the northern and southern populations of Pelias darevskii. It differs from all other vipers under comparison by a maximum number of zigzag wings in males, which is less only than in females of the nominate subspecies; comparatively high number of sublabials. From above, males are painted in grey and yellowish-grey tones, and females, in yellowishgrey and light brown tones; zigzag in both sexes consists of numerous transversely elongated spots, interrupted only in some places. The belly is light grey to black in females and spotty black, or almost black in males.Diagnosis (olguni). Small-sized snake, different from a related species Darevsky’s viper by the having smaller sizes of trunk, body, tail, lower number of preventrals, sublabials and wings of zigzag; by the having higher number of scales round a neck and middle of body, supralabials and crown shields. Parietal shields have incision in most of the specimens. Animals from above are painted in gray and russet tones; a zigzag does not consist of numerous transversal prolate spots, only in some part united. Belly from dark spotted to almost black.
Vipera dinniki	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (tuniyevi). Small-sized snake, males differ from all representatives of Pelias kaznakovi s.l. by minimal values of total length, length of pileus, width of head, numbers of ventral and subcaudal shields, and shields around eyes; females have minimal body length, length of pileus, width of head, number of shields around eyes and loreals, number of zigzag wings. The vipers of both sexes from the left-bank basin of the middle flow of the Kura River differ from all other compared vipers by small sizes and the minimum number of shields around the eyes. The dorsal surface of the males is beige-gray, yellowish-gray, rarely brownish-reddish, or yellow; the dorsal surface of the females is pinkish-gray, light brown, gray-yellow or melanistic. The majority of females has a weakly undulated zigzag pattern ranging in color from light- to dark-brown; the zigzag pattern of males is black or brown-black, with sharp wings and occasional interruptions. The throat in both sexes is light-colored, the belly is usually gray-spotted against a dark background; the lower part of the tail in both sexes is pinkish with varying numbers of dots in males and without dots in females (Ananjeva et al. 2021).
Vipera kaznakovi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (magnifica). A small viper of the Eurosiberian group. Coloration is not bright. Number of ventral shields and number of crown shields are the biggest for all representatives of "kaznakovi" complex.Coloration: there are melanistic and brown/black variants as well as intermediates (Tuniyev et al. 2016). Sindaco 2013: 410 shows a striped variant. Werner 1924 calls the melanistic form “prester”.
Vipera latastei	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (latastei): In relation to the other Iberian Lataste's viper subspecies, specimens of V. l. latastei reach in average larger sizes (SVL), present lower num- ber of periocular scales and higher number of subcaudal scales (both in females and males), and are characterized by the predominance of angular zigzag dorsal patterns with higher number of dorsal marks (see Figure 4a–e; Table S6 in MARTÍNEZ-FREIRÍA et al. 2021).Diagnosis (arundana): In relation to the other Iberian subspecies, vipers of V. l. arundana reach in average intermediate size (SVL), present higher number of periocular scales and lower number of subcaudal scales (both in fe- males and males), and present both wide angular and rounded zig- zag dorsal patterns with intermediate number of dorsal marks (see Figure 4j,k; Table S6 in MARTÍNEZ-FREIRÍA et al. 2021).Diagnosis (gaditana): In relation to the other Iberian subspecies, individuals of V. l. ga- ditana reach in average smaller sizes (SVL), present intermediate number of periocular scales and number of subcaudal scales (both in females and males), and are characterized by the predominance of rounded zigzag dorsal patterns with low number of dorsal marks (see Figure 4f–i; Table S6 in MARTÍNEZ-FREIRÍA et al. 2021).
Montivipera latifii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Nilson & Andrén 1986: 47
Vipera monticola	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (monticola): In relation to the other North African Mountain viper subspecies, V. m. monticola presents small size (but larger than the specimens from Western High Atlas), low number of intercanthal + intrasupraocular, loreal and periocular scales, moderate number of ventral scales, 19 dorsal rows (a characteristic also shared with vipers from other lineages), high number of dorsal marks and frequently, a barred dorsal pattern (a characteristic also shared with specimens from the Western High Atlas). Only dwarf specimens are known (see Table S7). See Figure 5a–c in MARTÍNEZ-FREIRÍA et al. 2021.Diagnosis (atlantica): In relation to the other North African Mountain viper subspecies, Vipera m. atlantica presents the smallest size, the highest number of intercanthal + intrasupraocular and ventral scales, moderate number of loreal and periocular scales, 19 dorsal rows (a characteristic shared with V. m. monticola and few specimens from the Rif-E.Atl-Alg lineage), moderate number of dorsal marks and frequently, a barred dorsal pattern (a characteristic also shared with V. m. monticola). Only dwarf specimens are known, resembling V. m. monticola but with previous mentioned differences (see Figure 5d,e; Table S7 in MARTÍNEZ-FREIRÍA et al. 2021).Diagnosis (saintgironsi): In relation to the other North African Mountain viper subspecies, V. m. saintgironsi presents larger size, moderate number of intercanthal + intrasupraocular scales, high number of loreal and periocular scales, low number of ventral scales, 19 to 23, frequently 21 dorsal rows at midbody, low number of dorsal marks, and variable dorsal pattern (including the three general types; see Figure 5f,j; Table S7). Specimens with dwarf characteristics (i.e., small size and 19 dorsal rows) are known for the Eastern High Atlas Mountains in Morocco (Figure 5H) and the Aurès Mountains in Algeria (i.e., paratype MNCN 50498, Appendix 3 in MARTÍNEZ-FREIRÍA et al. 2021).
Montivipera raddei	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (raddei): Nilson & Andrén 1986: 52Diagnosis (kurdistanica): Nilson & Andrén 1986: 55
Montivipera xanthina	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (nilsoni): M. x. nilsoni is distinct from the typical form as it is far larger in size that the standard type (males up to 140 cm in total length and weighing almost 1300 g, respectively, up to 95 cm and 380 g on the continent); for the tendency to have three rows of unilateral or bilateral circumocular scales (instead of two); for the larger number of rows of anterior dorsal scales (average  about 24 instead of 23); for the more extensive development of the dorsal pattern and absence or poor definition of the ventral semilunar spots in the adult.Diagnosis (dianae): M. x. dianae differs from the typical form as it has a larger number of rows of dorsal (with consequent increase in size) and anterior (25) scales, and also at mid-trunk (24 or 25, almost never 23) and to the rear (often 18 and 19) (in the typical form habitual respective values are 23, 23 and 17), as well as having a dark subocular spot, with the two black specks on the pileus mostly absent or poorly represented. It also presents unusual, paroxysmal or extreme defensive reactions, never found in specimens of M. xanthina elsewhere.Diagnosis (occidentalis): M. x. occidentalis differs from other known subspecies for the tendency to a reduced size and correspondingly for a lower number of intercanthals and of dorsal scales rows, both in the midbody (mostly 21-22) and in the posterior part of the body (often 15-16). Diagnosis (varoli): This subspecies has similar characteristics with those of the southern populations according to Nilson & Andren (1986). The whiteness between spots and zig-zag windings in the dorsum is more prominent in the new subspecies than in the southern population, and females have darker greyish-brown skin color than males. Whiteness between blackish spots can be also more prominent in male specimens compared to only adult female specimen. In three male specimens, there was almost no spotting and colorization under the head. The spots on ventrals became denser in the mid-body and forms darker colorization at the end of body. Also, just as stated in Nilson & Andren (1986), in three of the four evaluated specimens, they have neck spots united with the dorsal band. The tail tips of all four specimens are yellowish-orange or light orange while tail tip is yellow for other M. xanthina populations according to Nilson & Andren (1986). In addition to color-pattern properties, new subspecies are differ from M. x. nilsoni by having two series of circumocular scales which is similar to nominate subspecies; M. x. dianae by having lower number of rows of dorsal scales (anterior 23-24; mid-body 23; posterior 17-18); M. x. occidentalis a higher number of intercanthals and dorsal scales rows. Also new subspecies can be distinguished from other M. xanthina populations in Turkey by both having more intercanthals (12, 13) and less subcaudalia (≤30).
Protobothrops sieversorum	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (Triceratolepidophis): A genus of Asian pitviper belonging to the Trimeresurus group, characterized by a large size, reaching at least 1255 mm; elongated head and body; the presence of a nasal pore; strongly keeled dorsal scales, bearing an elongated longitudinal keel covering at least two thirds of the length of the scale, made o f a series o f three consecutive horns or crests, high and wide, rising progressively from front to back, separated by two lower but distinctively elevated parts (Fig.7a d), producing very strongly keeled dorsal scales; a tessellate fimbriate microdermatoglyphic pattern of dorsal scales with distinctly raised fimbriae; raised, hom-like multiple supraoculars; cephalic scales on upper head surface between supraoculars distinctly keeled for a part, all becoming progressively strongly keeled towards the occipital region; and a grayish brown ground color with a blotched dorsal pattern.Triceratolepidophis, although sharing several morphological similarities with other members ofthe genera Trimeresurus and Protobothrops, such as the ground color, blotched dorsal pattern, the upraised supraoculars. and head scalation, differs from all other Asian crotaline genera currently recognized in David and Ineich (1999), namely Calloselasma Cope,1860, Deinagkistrodon Gloyd, 1979, Ermia Zhang, 1993, Gloydius Hoge and Romano Hoge, 1981, Hypnale Fitzinger, 1843, Ovophis Burger in Hoge and Romano Hoge, 1981, Protobothrops Hoge and Romano Hoge, 1983, Trimeresurus Lacepecte, 1804, and Tropidolaemus Wagler, 1830, by the unique autapomorph scale structure as well as the unique microdermatoglyphic pattern of the Oberhautchen, which is tessellate fimbriate due to the upraising of the fimbriae. This structure is unique in the Trimeresurus group, in which other species have only the tessellate pattern typical of the Crotalinae (Ziegler et al. 2000: 201).Diagnosis: An Asian pitviper of the Trimeresurus group, characterized by the main diagnostic features given above for the genus, namely a large size, at least up to 1255 mm; elongated head and body; strongly keeled dorsal scales due to the presence on most o f them o f an elongated longitudinal keel made of a series of three consecutive, high and wide hom/crest-like summits, rising progressively from front to back, separated by two lower but distinctively elevated parts (Fig. 7a-d ); the tessellate fimbriate microdennatoglyphic pattern o f dorsal scales; raised, hom-like multiple supraoculars; cephalic scales between supraoculars keeled for a part and becoming progressively strongly keeled backwards on the occipital region; and an overall grayish ground color. Other diagnostic characters include the following features: 23 dorsal scale rows at midbody; high numbers of ventral and subcaudal plates, 228 and 82 respectively; 8-9 supralabials, first totally separated from nasal, the longest being numbers 4 and 5: upper preocular divided into 3 consecutive small scales, from front to back one large and two small; a single true loreal; 5th supralabial approximately as high and wide as the 4th; and a lower row of temporals much larger than upper rows.This species is distinguishable from all other Asian pitvipers by the unique macroand microstructures of the dorsal scales. The combination of other morphological characters are also sufficient to separate this species from all other known Asian pitvipers. However, the ground color and hom-like supra- oculars make it superficially similar to some other members of the genus Trimeresurus, namely T. cornutus and T. puniceus. Nevertheless, general habitus, color and pattern as well as meristic characters are shared by several species of the genus Protobothrops, especially P. mucrosquamatus.From the other homed species of the Trimeresurus group, Triceratolepidophis sieversorum is immediately distinguished by the strongly and uniquely keeled dorsal scales; furthermore, the structure of the supraoculars is different from T. cornutus, in which the 3 or 4 horns are convergent and confluent at their tips, whereas they are divergent and free in the new species. From the Indo-Malayan T. puniceus, it differs by the diagnostic characters given above, and much higher numbers of ventral and subcaudal plates. Other Indo-Malayan homed species, T. borneensis Peters, 1872 and T. brongersmai Hoge, 1969, also exhibit much lower numbers of ventral and subcaudal plates, and a strongly projected spatulate nose.From Protobothrops mucrosquamatus, to which superficially it is quite similar, this new taxon differs by the keels of the dorsal scales as well as a completely different microdermatoglyphic pattern, which is typically tessellate in P. mucrosquamatus, but also by the presence of raised supraoculars and an upper preocular divided into 3 scales instead of two as in P. mucrosquamatus.
Bothriechis thalassinus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Definition and diagnosis.–A moderately sized (up to almost a meter in total length), green, arboreal pitviper in which the tail comprises between 16-18% of the TL in males and females. There are 5-9 (x = 7.7) intersupraoculars that are distinctly keeled, 23-26 (x = 24.1) interrictals that are also keeled, 161-168 ventrals, 60-67 undivided subcaudals, and usually 21 (rarely 23) dorsal scale rows at midbody.Bothriechis schlegelii occurs on the same slopes as B. thalassinus but generally at lower elevations. Small, spinelike supraciliary scales between the eye and supraoculars and usually at least 23 dorsal scale rows at midbody distinguish B. schlegelii from B. thalassinus. Two other congeners that occur on the Atlantic slopes of northern Central America, but rarely, if ever, are sympatric with B. thalassinus, include. Bothriechis aurifer has a dorsal pattern of yellow blotches edged with a black border that is often fused between adjacent blotches, only 1-5 intersupraoculars, and usually 19 dorsal scale rows at midbody. Bothriechis marchi has irregular, mostly flat scales on the crown, at least a few of which are usually conspicuously larger than surrounding scales, 3-7 intersupraoculars, and usually 19 scales at midbody. Bothriechis rowleyi of Oaxaca and Chiapas, Mexico, may be distinguished from B. thalassinus in having 3-5 intersupraoculars that are irregularly shaped, the adjacent scales on the crown lacking parallel keeling, and 19 dorsal scale rows present at midbody.Bothriechis thalassinus most closely resembles B. bicolor of the Pacific slopes of southern Mexico and Guatemala, but B. bicolor differs in having more intersupraoculars (8-10, x = 8.7, in males; 8-11, x = 10.0 in females) and interrictals (27-31, x = 28.5, in males; 27-33, x = 30.3, in females). There is also a subtle difference in the shape of the first pair of infralabials. In B. bicolor these scales are relatively broad, whereas in B. thalassinus they are narrower and the exposure of the scales along the lingual margin is often reduced.Two montane congeners occur south of the Nicaraguan Depression in Costa Rica and Panama. Bothriechis nigroviridis has a green body heavily speckled or mottled with black on the sides and the dorsum, fewer ventrals (139-158) and subcaudals (47-58), and usually 19 dorsal scale rows at midbody. Bothriechis lateralis has distinctive yellow paravertebral vertical bars and yellow paraventral stripes on the body. Further, there are usually 23 midbody dorsal scale rows in this species. [from CAMPBELL & SMITH 2000].
Trimeresurus vogeli	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by (1) hemipenes short and strongly spinose, similar to Trimeresurus stejnegeri; (2) an overall green dorsum, rather dark green in males with faint dark crossbands, and bright, grass-green in females; (3) size very large, with distinct sexual dimorphism: females up to at least 1100 mm SVL, males seldom if ever above 800 mm SVL; (4) a constant lack of red color in the postocular streak in both males and females; this streak is whitish yellow and rather faint in males, and often absent in females; (5) a more or less well-defined white, whitish blue, whitish yellow or even bright yellow ventrolateral stripe in both sexes, not or rarely bordered below by a thin rusty red line in some adult or subadult males, a very unusual condition in the subgroup of T. stejnegeri, and never red in subadult and adult females; (6) the constant presence of white vertebral spots in males at any age, whereas they are always absent in females; (7) tail mostly green, with only the tip or the last 20% of its length mottled with rusty brown; (8) eyes yellow or yellowish green in both sexes; (9) tail average, with a ratio TaLTL in females ranging from 0.15 to 0.165; (10) large, thick heads in both sexes, very stout in females; (11) first supralabial distinct from nasal; (12) 21 dorsal scale rows at midbody, strongly keeled; (13) an elongated snout covered with rather small scales; (14) internasals always separated by 1 or 2 (rarely 3) scales; (15) large, irregular supraoculars, as wide as internasals, separated by 11 – 15 small and smooth cephalic scales. Trimeresurus vogeli differs from all other green pitvipers by the combination of the following characters: (1) its short, spinose hemipenis; (2) its first supralabials is separated from the nasal; (3) its ventrolateral stripes nearly always white, whitish blue or whitish yellow when present, very seldom red in males; (4) white vertebral spots are always present in males, always absent in females; (5) less than 174 ventrals; (6) no more than about 25% of its tail is rusty red. These and further characters are detailed below by DAVID et al. 2001.
Vipera orlovi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A medium-size viper of the Eurosibe-rian group. Head has more light coloration than body. Canthals and labials are white. Number of ventral shields and number of crown shields are the least for all representatives of "kaznakovi" complex.
Trimeresurus gumprechti	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis:–A species of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by (1) hemipenes short and strongly spinose; (2) overall bright green coloration in males, deep or dark green in females; (3) interstitial skin black; (4) large size, with a total length greater than 1200 mm in females; (5) conspicuous bicolored postocular stripe in males, thin and white below, wide and bright red above, reversed from the scheme of the ventrolateral stripe (only thin and white in females); (6) vivid, wide bicolored ventrolateral stripe, bright or deep red below/white above in males, extending along the lower part of the first third of the tail, white or blue but well defined in females; (7) eyes deep red in males, yellow in females; (8) tail mostly rusty or reddish-brown (see below); (9) tail long in males, with a ratio TaL/TL ranging from 0.160.21, rather short in females, 0.14-0.16; (10) VEN: 162-168; SC: 51-71; (11) first supralabial distinct from nasal; (12) 21 dorsal scale rows at midbody, moderately keeled; (13) snout covered with rather enlarged juxtaposed scales; (14) internasals either in contact or separated by only 1 scale; (15) supraoculars narrower than internasals, separated by 10-12 smooth cephalic scales.  T. gumprechti differs from all other green pitvipers by the combination of the following characters: (1) short, spinose hemipenis, (2) first supralabials separated from the nasal, (3) the very conspicuous (at least in life) reversed bicolored postocular stripe, white below and wide, bright or deep red above, always present in males (postocular streak only white in females), (4) the ventrolateral stripe, bright red below and white above in males, running under the first third of the tail, white in females, (5) eyes deep red in males, (6) black interstitial skin, (7) upper snout scales enlarged, (8) internasal scales often in contact or separated by at most one scale and (9) greatest part of upper surface of the tail rusty red. These characters and the comparisons with other species are detailed below in the Discussion.
Atheris hirsuta	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Slender tree viper with rather short head, IOD (Interorbital distance) / SED (Snout-eye distance) = 2.3; heavily carinated scales, especially on head and neck, giving the snake a bristly appearance; keels. run in long curves towards a sharp tip; six suprarostrals; eight to nine infralabials; three pairs of sublinguals; elongate dorsal scales; 16 scale rows around mid-body.Comparisons: Atheris hirsuta sp. nov. resembles A. squamigera in appearance but can be distinguished from the latter by several morphometric, and morphological characters. Its most intriguing difference is the elongated dorsal scalation, especially on the head and anterior body, which could not be observed to such an extent in any specimens of A. squamigera. Further distinguishing characters were: the number and arrangement of suprarostrals (SRO) (six in A. hirsuta; three or up to eight inA. squamigera, but usually odd numbers occur); the number of pairs of sublinguals (PSL) (three pairs in A. hirsuta; four to seven in A. squamigera); and the shape of the head and neck scales. Scales in A. squamigera are never as strongly bent as in A. hirsuta (Fig. 2 d, e), which in this respect appears similar to A. hispida and A. acuminata. Atheris hirsuta has a much shorter snout and larger eye than A. squamigera, giving the head a more blunt and stocky appearance. This is expressed by the IOD/SED index, which is 2.3 in A. hirsuta, compared with a maximum of 1.9 (mean 1.7) in A. squamigera. The number of mid-dorsal scale rows (MSR) in the holotype of A. hirsuta is comparatively low - only 16, which equals the lowest counts found in A. squamigera (SMNS 4213; 2MB 20481).Atheris hirsuta differed from the sympatric A. chlorechis by the number of suprarostrals (7-8 in A. chlorechis, arranged in alower row offour and an upper row of three to four scales) and the maximum transverse head scale count (MTHS) between the posterior supralabials (SL) (25-27 in A. chlorechis; 14 in A. hirsuta). Atheris chlorechis has higher infralabial counts (IL) (10-11; 8-9 in A. hirsuta) and higher numbers of dorsal scale rows at mid-body (25-37). Scales of A. chlorechis are not as strongly keeled and the keel only stretches across two thirds o f the entire scale, leaving a smooth, slightly depressed area uncovered. Our SEM-photos o f A. hirsuta revealed no serration o f keels on lateral scales, known to occur in some A. chlorechis (Groombridge, 1980, cited by Broadley, 1996, 1998).Atheris hirsuta differs from the East African species A. nitschei, A. rungweensis, A. desaixi, A. katangensis and A. ceratophora by having fewer transverse head scales, fewer interocunasals (ION) and higher numbers of dorsal scale rows at mid-body. Dorsal scalation in these species is never as elongate as in A. hirsuta. The latter lacks serrated keels on lateral scales, present in the species mentioned above. The lack of elongate supraoculars that form hom-like projections above theeyes furthermore distinguishes A. hirsuta from A. ceratophora. Keels in A. rungweensis and A. desaixi end before the scale tip, whereas they reach the tip in the other members of this group, as well as in A. hirsuta. A. rungweensis and A. desaixi have more interoculabials (IOL), as well as higher numbers of infralabials. The number of pairs of sublinguals is higher in A. desaixi. Atheris broadleyi from Cameroon is distinguished from A. hirsuta by having more interoculabials, a higher number of scale rows at mid-body and fewer interorbitals (IOS), and by its consistent dorsal colour pattern, also used to distinguish it from the closely related A. squamigera (Lawson, 1999). Two distinctive East African species, A. hispida and A. acuminata, also posses acuminate or lanceolate dorsal scales, but differ from A. hirsuta by having fewer transverse head scales and a lower number of suprarostrals, as well as fewer pairs ofsublinguaIs. In addition, A. hispida has a higher number of interocunasals. Atheris acuminata has a lower number of circumorbital scales, as well as lower numbers of supralabiaIs. For a summary of differences between A. hirsuta and other Atheris species, see Table 4 (in Ernst & Rödel 2002).Coloration. Dorsal coloration in life is bronze; several scale tips and keels being dark-brown, forming an irregular pattern of broken crossbars; ventrally cream-white to yellowish; iris yellow (Fig. 3). In preservative (3 % formaldehyde transferred to 70 % ethanol after two months), colour changed to reddish-brown dorsally; ventral scales turned uniform clear reddish brown, being more intense in posterior third of body and tail, fading anteriorly.The key to the genus Atheris on p. 74 of Chippaux & Jackson 2019, says that A. hirsuta can be distinguished from A. hispida by its possession of only one row of scales between the eye and the nasal, while in reality it has two rows, as can be seen in the original description of A. hirsuta and on the photos provided by Penner et al. (2013) and by Chippaux and Jackson themselves (Pauwels & Brecko 2020).
Trimeresurus nebularis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of Trimeresurus characterized by (1) hemipenes long, without spines; (2) 1 st supralabial distinct from nasal; (3) 21 DSR at midbody, moderately keeled; (4) overall bright green coloration with blue tones and blue upper lips in males and females, and yellowish green chin and throat; (5) large size, with a TL up to about 1000 mm in males and at leat 950 mm in females; (6) postocular streak absent in males and females; (7) ventrolateral stripes often missing, or white or pale blue; (9) upper lips bluish-green; (10) eye green in males and females; (11) tail dark rusty brown vertebrally, green laterally with a sharp border between the colours (similar to Trimeresurus albolabris or T. macrops); (12) a low number of scales between the supraoculars (9–10); (13) tail average in females, with a ratio TaL/TL 0.165–0.172; (14) VEN 147–153; SC: 50–65 (after VOGEL et al. 2004).Comparison with other species. —Trimeresurus nebularis differs from all other pitvipers of the Trimeresurus popeiorum complex by the combination of the following characters: (1) tail with a sharp border between the green and the brown colour; (2) eye colour green at both sexes; (3) postocular streak absent in both sexes; (4) a larger size; (5) the lowest number of scales between the supraoculars; (6) the lowest number of subcaudals; (7) a low number of ventrals; (8) the lack of sexual dimorphism; (9) upper lips bluish- green; (10) ventrolateral stripes often pale blue. Main characters separating Trimeresurus nebularis from other taxa of the group are given in Tables 12–13 (in VOGEL et al. 2004). Trimeresurus nebularis differs from T. popeiorum by (1) the colour of the eye (never red in T. nebularis); (2) the number of Cep between the supraoculars; (3) the presence of a postocular streak in males of T. popeiorum; (4) the presence of a ventro-lateral streak in females of T. popeiorum; (5) a stronger keeling of the Occ and Tem in T. popeiorum; (6) a lower number of VEN in females (147–153 [x = 150.4, s = 2.3] vs. 154– 168 [x = 161.6, s = 4.2] in T. popeiorum). Trimeresurus nebularis differs from Trimeresurus fucatus by (1) the absence of dorsal crossbands in males; (2) a white or blue ventrolateral stripe in males, vs. a bicolor ventro-lateral stripe in males of T. fucatus, and the absence of this stripe in females vs. a conspic-uous white stripe in females of T. f ucat us; (3) the absence of a postocular streak in males; (4) the pattern of the tail; (5) a lower number of ventral scales (149–153 [x = 151.7, s = 2.3] in males of T. nebularis vs. 156–171 [x = 164.0, s = 3.5] in males of T. fucat us; in females 147–153 [x = 150.4, s = 2.3] vs. 157–170 [x = 163.5, s = 3.4] in T. fucatus; (6) a lower number of subcaudal scales (61–65 [x = 63.0, s = 2.8] in males of T. nebularis vs. 69–84 [x = 75.9, s = 3.5] in males of T. fucatus; in females 50–60 [x = 55.2, s = 3.8] vs. 59– 73 [x = 63.8, s = 3.6] in T. fucatus). Trimeresurus nebularis differs from Trimeresurus sabahi by: (1) a larger size; (2) the colour of the eyes (green vs. bright red in T. sabahi); (3) the pattern of the tail; (4) the presence of ventrolateral stripes in both sexes of T. sabahi; (5) a lower number of SC in both sexes (in males 61–65 [x = 63.0, s = 2.8] vs. 69–76 [x = 71.6, s = 2.5] in T. sabahi; in females 50–60 [x = 55.2, s = 3.8] vs. in T. sabahi 59–65 [x = 62.2, s = 2.7]); (6) the contact of 3 rd SL with the subocular, in contact in all examined specimens of T. nebularis, sepa-rated in 14/20 occurrences in T. sabahi; (7) by proportionnally wider supraocular scales in T. nebularis (ratio L–SpOc/W–SpOc: 2.4–2.8 ([x = 2.5, s = 0.1] in T. nebul ari s, vs. 2.8–3.3 [x = 3.0, s = 0.2] in T. sabahi). Lastly, Trimeresurus nebularis differs from T. barat i by: (1) a larger size; (2) the pat-tern of the tail; (3) the colour of eyes in both sexes; (4) the ventrolateral stripe in males (bicolor in T. barati); (4) the number of MSR (21 vs. usually 17–19 in T. barati); (5) a snout shorter in T. nebularis than in T. barat i (ratio DEP/DEN: 0.52–0.57 [x = 0.53, s = 0.03] vs. in T. barati 0.56–0.62 [x = 0.59, s = 0.02]) (after VOGEL et al. 2004).Abbreviations: SVL = Snout-vent length, TaL = Tail length, TL = Total length, HL = Head length, SnL = Snout length (from the tip of rostral to a line connecting the ante-rior, eye margins), HED = Eye diameter (horizontal), VED = Eye diameter (vertical), DEL = Distance lower eye margin–edge of the lip, DEN = Distance between the anterior eye margin and the nostril, DEP = Distance between the anterior eye margin and the loreal pit, WInN = Width of internasals (means), LSupOc = Length of supraoculars, WSupOc = Width of supraoculars, L3SL = Length of 3 rd supralabial, H3SL = Height of 3 rd supralabial, H4SL = Length of 4 th supralabial, TaL/TL = Ratio tail length/Total length, SnL/HL = Ratio snout length/head length, DEP/HL = Ratio distance eye–pit/head length, DEN/HL = Ratio distance eye–nostril/head length, DEP/DEN = Ratio distance eye–pit/distance eye–nostril, WInN/WSupOc = Ratio width of internasals/width of supraoculars, L3SL/HL = Ratio length of 3 rd supralabial/head length, VED/DEL = Ratio: vertical eye diameter/distance eye margin–edge of the lip, LSupOc/WsupOc = Ratio of the length of supraocular/width of the supraoculars, DSR = Dorsal scale rows, MSR = Dorsal scale rows at midbody, VEN = Ventral plates, SC = Subcaudal plates, SL = Supralabial scales, HeSc = Head scales (scales on a longitudinal row between the interna-sals, and the limit of the neck), SnSc = Snout scales (scales on a line between the internasals and a line, connecting the anterior margin of eye), InN = Internasal scale(s), Can = Canthal scales (scales between the internasal and the subocular), Cep = Cephalic scales (scales on a line between the middle of supraoc-ulars), Tem = Temporal scales, IL = Infralabials, NVEN = Number of ventral plates, NSC = Number of subcaudal plates, NASR = Number of dorsal scale rows behind head, NMSR=  Number of dorsal scale rows at midbody, NPSR = Number of dorsal scale rows before vent, KMSR = Keeling of dorsal scale rows at midbody, TNSL = Total number of supralabial scales, C3SL = Number of scales between 3 rd supralabial and subocular, C4SL = Number of scales between 4 th supralabial and subocular, C45SL = Number of scales between 4 th and 5 th supralabial and subocular, NCep = Number of cephalic scales on a line between the supraoculars, KOcc = Keeling of the occipital scales, KTem = Keeling of temporal scales, NInN = Number of scales separating the internasals, CSupOC = Number of scales directly in contact with supraocular\, NSnSc = Number of snout scales (defined as above), NHeSc = Number of longitudinal head scales (defined as above), TNIL = Total number of infralabial scales, DBB = Presence of darker bands on body, VSB Presence of a line of white vertebral spots, POSTM = Presence of a postocular streak in males, POSTF= Presence of a postocular streak in females, CPOST = Coloration of the postocular streak, VELSM = Presence of a ventrolateral stripe in males, VELSF = Presence of a ventrolateral stripe in females, CVEL = Coloration of the ventrolateral stripe, COLEM = Colour of eyes in males, COLEF = Colour of eyes in females, TAP = Pattern of the tail.Diagnosis (P. inornata): The new species is distinguished from  other species of the Trimeresurus (sensu lato) complex,  with the exception of other members of the genus Popeia and some members of the genus Cryptelytrops  Cope, 1860, by a long calyculate hemipenis without  papillae (as described in Malhotra and Thorpe, 2004b).  Popeia inornata is distinguished from members of  Cryptelytrops by full separation of the first supralabial  and nasal scales. It is distinguished from other members  of Popeia by the absence of a red or orange lateral stripe  in adult males. Both sexes of P. inornata are separated  from P. popeiorum sensu stricto by low ventral scale  counts (no higher than 156, compared to no lower than  158), and from both P. popeiorum and the southern clade  species by green eye coloration, with the exception of  West Malaysian representatives of the southern clade,  from which P. inornata can be distinguished by low ventral scale counts alone (149 – 156 vs. 157 – 172). With  respect to the classification of Regenass and Kramer  (1981), P. inornata is distinguished from the Borneo  population (T. p. sabahi sensu Regenass and Kramer,  1981) by the absence of a red or orange lateral stripe in  adult males and by green eye coloration in both sexes. It  differs from snakes from the Barisan range of western  Sumatra (T. p. barati sensu Regenass and Kramer, 1981)  in having a longer and less compact head, a coloration of  interstitial skin and dorsal scale bases that forms black  bands with narrow light blue interspaces (vs. no dark  bands on uniformly bluish gray to blue interstitial skin),  and lower and upper margins of supralabials and infralabials, respectively, that are distinctly blue in life (vs.  bluish white to lighter blue). Popeia inornata is further  distinguished from west Sumatran specimens by the dorsal coloration of the tail which in life is a well-defined  and solid brick red with light margins on red dorsal  scales (vs. a light brown to golden hue which is less  clearly demarcated laterally). While Regenass and Kramer (1981) distinguished T. p. barati on the basis of  lower midbody dorsal scale counts (17 – 19 vs. 21 in the  rest of their T. popeiorum group), an additional specimen examined by Sanders, Malhotra, and Thorpe  (unpublished) from west Sumatra has 21 scale rows.  Additional morphological characters that can be used  in combination to diagnose the new species are listed  in Table 1; diagnostic molecular characters are given  above (3.2).Popeia inornata is not known to share its geographic range with any other green pitviper species. It is  easily distinguished from juvenile and adult male Tropidolaemus wagleri (Boie, 1827) by the distinct red and  white pre- and postocular stripe, red and white dorsal  bands or spots, and keeled scales on the lower side of the  head possessed by the latter species. Adult females of  T. wagleri are even more distinct from P. inornata due to  their highly divergent, largely black and yellow coloration and relatively massive girth. The new species can  be distinguished from Parias hageni (Lidth de Jeude,  1886) by the dorsal coloration and pattern of the tail,  which in Pa. hageni is green with a few irregular reddish-brown spots, and solid reddish-brown only in about  the distal half of the tail (vs. laterally well-defined and  solid brick red from about the anal region to the tip in  P. inornata).
Trimeresurus popeiorum	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS): Scales in 21 (rarely 23) longitudinal rows at midbody; 9–11 upper labials, first upper labials separated from nasals by a distinct suture; a single supraocular; above green, below pale green to whitish, the two separated by a bright bicolored orange or brown (below) and white (above) (males) or white (females) ventrolateral stripe, which occupies the whole of the outermost scale row and a portion of the second row; ventrals 155–169; subcaudals 52–76, in males the base of the tail enlarged to the level of subcaudals 20–25; hemipenes long and slender, smooth, without spines. Total length 770 mm, tail length 170 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]Diagnosis (popeiorum). A Trimeresurus bearing 21 (rarely 19) dorsal scale rows at midbody with an overall bright green colour, lacking bands; males may bear a bicoloured postocular stripe and a bicoloured ventrolateral stripe is always present. SVL 414–692 mm in males, 417–710 mm in females. Hemipenis deeply forked, reaching the 25th subcaudal. Ventrals 158–170 in males, 161–169 in females; subcaudals 62–76 in males, 55–66 in females; nasal and first supralabial separate. TaL 107–194 mm in males, 75–139 mm in females; TaL/TL 0.18–0.22 in males, 0.14–0.19 in females. Palatine with four teeth; pterygoid with eight teeth; 10–12 dentary teeth. Maxilla with one functional and 5–6 replacement fangs. (Mirza et al. 2023)Description based on examined specimens (popeiorum, n = 19). Body long and moderately stout, SVL 414–600 mm; head triangular and elongate, head length 20–24.3 mm (HL/SVL 0.04–0.05); head width 13.4–21 mm; (HW/ HL 0.64–0.88) clearly distinct from neck; distance between nostrils 3.8–7 mm; distance between preoculars 8.6–12.8 mm; distance between the tip of snout and anterior border of eye 6.6 mm; distance between nostril to eye 5.1–6.7 mm. Canthus rostralis distinct; a single large scale between the nasal and supraocular. Rostral subtriangular, slightly visible when viewed from above; nasal and first supralabial separate, wider than tall; three internasals, the outer pair of internasals larger than the one in the middle, and the one in the middle less than half the width of the outer ones. bordered by six scales on its posterior margin; two small scales separate the third supralabial from the nasal; second and third supralabial and three preoculars encompass the loreal pit; the lower preocular forms the lower margin of the loreal pit; one elongate and narrow supraocular; cephalic scales (CEP) small, irregular, subimbricate, smooth; longitudinal cephalic scales 27–31, gradually increasing in size towards the posterior part of the head; 10–11 CEP between anterior edge of the supraoculars and 14–17 at the posterior edge; occipital scales smooth; seven rows of scales between the internasals and anterior border of the supraoculars flat and irregular in their shape; the rows towards the posterior part of the head gradually show a feeble keel; temporals feebly keeled and subequal; subocular crescent shaped; 9–13 supralabials; SL1 not fused with nasal scale, 2nd much higher than 1st, 3rd highest among the supralabials; 4th widest, separated from the subocular by a single row of smooth scales and the lower loreal scale; 4th supralabial separated from the subocular by two rows of smooth scales; the remaining supralabials slightly decreasing in size posteriorly and in contact with temporal scales; 10–13 infralabials, the first pair in contact with each other; the first three pairs in contact with anterior chin shields; six pairs of chin shields, each pair in contact medially; separated from infalabials by 1–5 scale rows.Body scalation. 19, 21 or 23 dorsal scales one head length behind the head (rarely 17); 21 dorsal scales at midbody, rarely 19; 13–15 dorsal scales one head length anterior to the vent; dorsal scales rhomboid, moderately keeled except for the first row which is smooth; 0–3 preventrals; ventrals 158–170 in males, 161–169 in females ventral scales; subcaudals 62–76 in males, 55–66 in females subcaudal scales; paired; single cloacal plate. Eye large, with VED/DEL ratio 0.85; tail short; ventrally depressed; TaL 107–194 mm in males, 75–139 mm in females; TaL/TL 0.18–0.22 in males, 0.14–0.19 in females. Tail prehensile. Hemipenis long and deeply forked at the 5–6th subcaudal, extending to the 23–25th subcaudal scales, calyculate throughout the arms of the fork, lacking spines. (Mirza et al. 2023)Colouration in life (Fig. 3). Males overall in a shade of bright green throughout, slightly lighter ventrally. Scales on the dorsum are green with cyan edges. Bicoloured postocular strip, usually red and white, runs from the posterior part of the subocular to the angle of the jaw. The line extends all the way up to the tail; the outermost dorsal scale row bears a white spot at the tip and is blood red for the rest of the part, bordered by the second row, which is white in its lower half and green on its upper half. The tail in both sexes may be rusty, red or brown. The ventrolateral aspect of the tail in males may bear a discontinuous stripe. The females lack the postocular and ventrolateral stripes. The ventral scales bear a slight yellowish tinge. The males may lack the postocular stripe. The eyes of both sexes are blood red. (Mirza et al. 2023)Diagnosis (yingjiangensis). Trimeresurus yingjiangensis sp. nov. is assigned to Popeia group by hemipenes morphology (Malhotra and Thorpe, 2004), differ with its congeners by a combination of following characters: (1) dorsal body olive drab,without cross bands on the scales; (2) a conspicuous bicolor ventrolateral stripe present on each side of males, first row of dorsal scales firebrick with a white ellipse dot on posterior upper part in male, these strips absent in females; (3) the eyes firebrick in both gender; tail red, mottled with green laterally, and the ventrolateral stripes discontinuous on the tail; (4) hemipenes long, reaching 23rd to 25th SC, forked opposite 5-6th SC (n = 4), bifurcated near the base and the sulcus spermaticus split from the apex to basal without spines; (5) 21 DSR at middle body, moderately keeled; VEN = 164–168 (n = 5), SC = 60–76 (n = 5); Sexual dimorphism, the female has more ventrals and fewer subcaudals than males; (6) tail long, with ratios of TaL/TL between 0.199 and 0.219 in male.Comparison with other species (yingjiangensis). T. yingjiangensis sp. nov. is distinct from T. popeiorum (Lectotype, Pope and Pope, 1933) by the following characters: (1) First row of dorsal scales on each side firebrick with a white ellipse dot on posterior upper part in males vs. “brown with yellow tip” in males; (2) lowest quarter of second row white in males vs. “yellow below keel”; (3) suboculars separated from 3rd upper labial by one scale on each side vs. “two scales on each side”; (4) upper part of second upper labial separated from nasal by two small scales smaller than nostril on either side vs. “separated from nasal by two large scales on either side”.T. yingjiangensis sp. nov. is distinct from T. nebularis by the following characters: (1) body olive drab, upper lips green with white tip, vs. body bright green with blue tones and blue upper lips; (2) eyes firebrick vs. pale green; (3) ventrolateral stripes bicolor in males vs. uniformly white or blue; (4) in males: ventrals 164–167 (n = 4), vs. 149–153 (n = 8), subcaudals 71–76 (n = 4) vs. 61–65 (n = 8).T. yingjiangensis sp. nov. is different from T. sabahi, T. cf sabahi (from Sumatra), T. fucatus, T. barati and T. toba by following characters: (1) MSR 21 (vs. MSR 19 in T. barati); (2) dorsal color was olive drab with conspicuous bicolor ventrolateral stripes and no crossbars (vs. dorsal color was green with irregular rusty or reddish-brown dorsal crossbands and white dots on the vertebral scales in T. fucatus); (3) the ventrolateral stripe bicolor in males (vs. white in males of T. cf sabahi from Sumatra, and white in males of T. toba); (4) the temporal scales smaller than those in T. toba; (5) no ventrolateral stripe present on females (vs. white or yellow ventrolateral stripe present on females of T. sabahi); (6) the eyes firebrick (vs. yellow in T. sabahi, and orange in T. barati); (7) VEN 164–168, n = 5 (vs. VEN 142–158, n = 17 in T. barati, 147–157, n = 14, in T. sabahi, and 153–155, n = 3, in Sumatra T. cf sabahi). The comparisons of main morphological characters are summarized in Table 2 in Chen et al. 2019.
Trimeresurus septentrionalis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Scales in 21 longitudinal rows at midbody; 10-11(12) upper labials, the first fused to the nasal; head scales small, subequal, feebly imbricate, smooth or weakly keeled; supraoculars narrow, undivided, 9-11 interocular scales between them; temporal scales smooth; green above, below, green, yellowish or white below, a faint ventrolateral stripe present in all males, absent in females; end of tail not mottled brown; ventrals: males 162-172, females 160-181; subcaudals: males 68-83, females 55-71, paired; hemipenes without spines. Total length males 610 mm, females 730 [partly based on G. Vogel, pers. comm.].Redescription of holotype. An adult male with a subcaudal incision; overall in good condition. Habitus slender; head triangular, flat on top, wider than mid-trunk, snout subovate in profile, bluntly rounded at tip; neck evident, slim compared to mid-trunk; canthus rostralis discernable; tail tapering to a fine point. Scales rather smooth along the lateral aspects of the body; obtusely keeled on dorsal aspect covering the vertebral and paravertebral rows, especially on the hinder half. Rostral slightly visible from above, much reduced; two large internasals that have broad midline contact; head scales rather flat, small; supraoculars bean-shaped, enlarged; right and left ones separated by 10 cephalic scales in line between them; preocular large; subocular elongate, crescent-shaped; postocular 1, very small; SL 11/10, first SL in contact with nasal; 2nd SL forming anterior margin of loreal pit; 3rd one large, contacting an elongate presubocular scale that borders the posterior margin of loreal pit; IL 12; mental wider than long; anterior genials larger than posterior series of genials; PV 3; VEN 164, mildly angulate laterally; anal scale 1; SC 79 pairs; DSR: 21:21:15. TL: 633.0 mm (SVL: 486.0 mm, TaL: 147.0 mm); TaL/TL: 23.2%; HL: 25.7 mm; HW: 14.1 mm; ED: 3.6 mm; END: 5.4 mm; ELD: 4.0 mm. Colouration in alcohol bluish overall; dorsum light blue all across the body, except for anterior parts of head that has brownish tinge, similarly the tail ending too has a brownish/brick- red tinge; mental and gular regions cream; venter of a lighter shade of blue than the dorsum; posterior parts of subcaudals with a reddish tinge; a distinct white streak from below the eye to up to jaw angle apparently continuing across neck as a white ventrolateral stripe extending posteriorly till tail base. (Vogel et al. 2022)Variation: In general, agreeing well with the holotype and showing the following intra-specific variation: SVL: 252–701 mm; TaL: 58–147 mm; TaL/TL: 18.7–23.2% (males), 14.7–17.1% (females); HL: 16.3–36.8 mm; HW: 10.0–22.2 mm; DSR: 21–23 (near neck): 21(midbody): 15–17 (near tail), anterior rows 22 and 23 on three occasions, posterior rows 16 and 17 on two occasions; PV 1–2; V: 164–171; SC: 74–80 pairs (males), 56–66 pairs (females); SL 12; IL 13–14; white postocular streak absent on both sides in two male paratypes (out of 4 occasions); ventrolateral white stripe dark below, in one male paratype; postocular streak and ventrolateral white stripes absent in all female paratypes and other specimens. (Vogel et al. 2022)
Porthidium porrasi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Porthidium porrasi may be distinguished from all congeners by a combination of the following features: snout extremely elevated, tail tip white in both juveniles and adults, ventrals fewer than 145, and usually 25-27 midbody dorsal scale rows.
Craspedocephalus andalasensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus, endemic to Sumatra characterized by the combination of the following characters: (1) an overall brown coloration, with 17–25 darker crossbands, related to the sex: in males, background colour in various shades of dark greyish-brown with darker irregular dorsolateral blotches, with below, an irregular, elongated blotch of same colour; between the blotches, the background colour is often darker than on the sides of body, with scales heavily powdered with dark producing a confused but not lichen-like pattern; in females, pattern less contrasted but not distinctly paler than in males, in shades of dark yellow-ochre with darker blotches, without the dotted pattern, with broad darker edges and a wide lighter centre, producing a “saddle-like” pattern; males have a more complex pattern, but are not darker than females; (2) a distinctly projected and raised snout, strongly obliquely truncated when seen from the side, subrectangular seen from above; (3) internasals projected, strongly spatulate and bilobate; (4) 19 or more often 21 MSR, smooth or weakly keeled; (5) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (6) 2nd supralabials bordering the whole of the anterior margin of the loreal pit; (7) 1 to 3 narrow supraoculars, flat or barely convex; (8) a low number of VEN: 144–149 in males and 151–156 in females; (9) occipital and temporal scales smooth or weakly keeled; and (10) IL of the first pair not in contact each with the other [from DAVID et al. 2006].
Tropidolaemus laticinctus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of Tropidolaemus, an Asian pitviper genus characterized by strongly keeled gular scales, a splenial that is separate from the angular (Burger 1971), and a unique dorsal scale microdermatoglyphic pattern of rounded cells that are strongly covered with longitudinal parallel lines and comb-like ridges (Hoge & Romano-Hoge 1983; striocristate pattern subtype sensu Price 1982, verified in ZMB 47809). Tropidolaemus laticinctus differs from all congeners by the following combination of characters: lack of pronounced sexual or ontogenetic differences in color pattern; presence of ornate head pattern with brown dorsal markings on green ground that are bordered by cream scales and are largest on the posterior head; wide brown pre- and postocular stripe that extends to lower side of head beyond angle of jaw; ornate labial pattern consisting of brown spots bordered by white or black, on green to cream ground color; conspicuous large brown spot extending from anteroventral corner of eye and posteroventral margin of pit to lower margin of supralabials; lower side of head with similar pattern as dorsal side of head, or mottled with numerous brown and black spots and streaks; dorsal body pattern consisting of broad brick-red to brown rings that may be incomplete dorsally or laterally and are about as wide as or wider than the cream to white interspaces; anterodorsal part of light interspaces of body pattern containing wide green bands; brown rings across belly connected midventrally to form midventral stripe (if brown rings incomplete ventrally, venter heavily spotted, with chessboardlike pattern); base of tail with whitish and brown rings, tip of tail lighter reddish brown with no or only indistinct bands. Tropidolaemus wagleri differs from T. laticinctus in having distinct sexual differences in color pattern, in females undergoing a dramatic ontogenetic color change from a bright green ground color to a largely black and yellow coloration with or without green components, in lacking an extensively patterned venter, and in lacking an ornate labial pattern. Juvenile females of T. wagleri further differ from T. laticinctus in having a dorsal pattern of very narrow red and white bands on bright green ground color and in lacking a dorsal head pattern; male T. wagleri of all ages differ from T. laticinctus in having a dorsal pattern of tiny red and white spots and in lacking a dorsal head pattern. Members of the T. subannulatus complex (including the types of Trimesurus [sic] philippensis Gray, 1842, Trimesurus [sic] subannulatus Gray, 1842, and Trigonocephalus wagleri var. celebensis Gray, 1849) differ from T. laticinctus in lacking a well-defined ornate head pattern with light-bordered dorsal markings and in lacking an ornate labial pattern, in lacking a ventral pattern of brown rings and/or midventral stripe, and in having a dorsal pattern of narrow bands or spots (vs. broad brickred to brown rings). Both sexes of sympatric members of the T. subannulatus complex differ from T. laticinctus in having a uniform or near-uniform green dorsal head color (fig. 8C in KUCH et al. 2007, vs. ornate brown head pattern), a narrower bluish (vs. wide brown) pre- and postocular stripe and largely patternless labial region (fig. 7C, vs. ornate labial pattern), the presence (vs. absence) of well-defined, black-edged ocelli on outer posterior margins of ventral scales (fig. 7C), and an otherwise uniform green to bluish green venter (vs. heavily patterned venter with brown rings and midventral stripe). Sympatric members of the T. subannulatus complex further differ from T. laticinctus in having narrow white and bluish or reddish bands or spots on uniform green ground color (fig. 11C, vs. broad brick-red to brown rings), and in having a tail pattern consisting of narrow bluish bands and wide green interspaces at the base and nearly equidistant, distinct narrow black and white bands on brownish to greyish ground towards the tail tip (fig. 11C, vs. well-defined, approximately equidistant light and brown rings on base of tail, and light reddish brown tail tip with no or only indistinct bands). Adult females of sympatric members of the T. subannulatus complex also differ from the adult female T. laticinctus illustrated by de Lang & Vogel (2005, 2006) in having a yellow to golden (figs. 7C, 11C; vs. reddish) eye color. In characters of scalation, the specimens of the available small series of T. laticinctus (N=5) differ from the examined T. subannulatus complex members from Sulawesi (N=16) in having a slightly convex anterior margin of the mental scale (vs. centrally concave when viewed from the same angle, or indented at the level of the tongue), and in having higher ventral scale counts (139–146 vs. 134–139, respectively). The females of T. laticinctus (N=3) also differ from the majority of examined T. subannulatus complex females from Sulawesi (11 of 13) in having a higher number of dorsal scale rows at midbody (25 vs. 23, respectively).
Craspedocephalus wiroti	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus, endemic to Peninsular Thailand and West Malaysia, characterized by the combination of the following characters: (1) an usually overall dark or very dark pattern, with 22–35 darker crossbands, related to the sex: in males, background colour in various shades of dark greyish-brown, with dark brown irregular dorsolateral blotches, with below an irregular, elongated smaller blotch of same colour; areas between the bloches darker than on the sides of body, heavily powdered with dark and light dots or blotches producing a confused pattern, but not lichen-like; in females, pattern less complex and often as dark or darker than in males, in shades of dark brown with darker subrectangular dorsolateral blotches, without the dotted pattern but with broad darker edges and a wide lighter centre producing a “saddle-like” pattern; males have a more complex pattern, but are as dark as females (2) a distinctly projected and raised snout, strongly obliquely truncated when seen from the side, subrectangular seen from above; (3) internasals projected, strongly spatulate and bilobate, distinctly upturned; (4) usually 21 (rarely 19, 20 or 23) DSR at midbody; (5) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (6) 2nd supralabials bordering the whole of the anterior margin of the loreal pit; (7) 2 to 4 small and narrow supraoculars, convex or granular and raised; (8) VEN: 159–167 in males and 158–167 in females, SC: 43–56; (9) occipital and temporal scales moderately keeled or smooth in both sexes in adults, usually smooth in juvenile specimens; (10) IL of the first pair not in contact each with the other; and (11) hemipenes short, reaching 9th SC, with spines [from DAVID et al. 2006].
Tropidolaemus subannulatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Tropidolaemus, characterized by (1) the internasals separated by 2 (rarely 1) scales, never in contact; (2) a background colour in the shades of green, namely green, blue or green and blue ground in females, green (blue in some Negros populations) in males and juveniles; (3) crossbands around the body blue and white, red and white, blue, blue and red or white in adult females, white parts can be light blue in life, white spots or white and red spots in males and juveniles; (4) a variable postocular stripe in adult females and a white and red one in juveniles and males; (5) in adult females the belly is uniform or blotched with blue or red, never banded, in males and juveniles the belly is uniform or with red dots; (6) 128– 148 VEN in males and 127–147 in females, SC: 45–53 in males and 40–54 in females; (7) 21–23 MSR in males and 21–29 in females, keeling variable in both sexes; (9) 4–7 scales on the snout at males and 5 – 8 in females; (10) 3rd SL nearly always (87 / 90 occurrences) separated from the subocular by 1 scale or 2 scales, without sexual dimorphism; (10) tail long in males, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.146 and 0.182, moderate to long in females, 0.139–0.183; (11) occipital scales distinctly keeled in males (from VOGEL et al. 2007).
Tropidolaemus philippensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Tropidolaemus, characterized by (1) the internasals separated by 1 or 2 scales; (2) only 6–7 cephalic scales between the middle of the supraoculars at both sexes; (3) 18–19 MSR in both sexes, smooth or weakly keeled; (4) 7–8 SL on each side, or a total number of 15–16 supralabials in both sexes; (5) 0, rarely 1 scale, between 3rd SL and subocular in both sexes; (6) 4–5 scales on the snout in both sexes; (7) a total number of 16–17 infralabials in both sexes; (8) a greenish-turquoise body background coloration in males, seemingly more green in females; (9) dorsal blotches on the body, black with unfilled dorsals so some kind of net is visible; (10) a black or rarely white postocular stripe in both sexes; (11) belly uniform in both sexes; (12) VEN: 131–135 in males and 129 in the sole available preserved female specimen, SC: 45–46 in males and 44 in a female; (13) tail moderate in males and females, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.143 and 0.155, without sexual dimorphism; (14) occipital scales weekly keeled in males and strongly keeled, like partly raised in females (from VOGEL et al. 2007).
Pseudocerastes urarachnoides	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS: A Pseudocerastes with a short tail (TL/T= 9.65), few pairs of subcaudals (15 in the known specimens), the distal pairs forming an oval knob-like structure; lateral dorsal caudal scales projected to form elongate "appendages" alongside terminal knob. Several rows of lateral dorsal scales are weakly keeled.
Trimeresurus honsonensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Cryptelytrops honsonensis differs from all other species of Cryptelytrops by the combination of having dark body bands; lacking a ventrolateral stripe and a red or reddish-brown tail; having a dull-yellow to brown ground color as opposed to being green; females having a maximum SVL of 557 mm and a SVL of 523 mm in the single male; females having a TaL/SVL ratio of 0.15–0.16 and a ratio of 0.23 in the single male; 21 dorsal scale rows at midbody; 183–186 ventral scales in females and 186 in the male; 54–58 subcaudal scales in females and 74 in the male; 10 or 11 supralabials and 12 infralabials; 9–12 scales across the top of the head; smooth occipital and temporal scales; internasals in contact; and the third and fourth supralabials not contacting the subocular scale. Table 2 summarizes the states of these characters across all 13 species of Cryptelytrops [from GRISMER et al. 2008].
Bothrops chloromelas	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothriopsis chloromelas is distinguished from all congeners and from species of Bothrocophias and Bothrops by the following combination of characters: (1) lacunolabial present; (2) dorsal keels nontuberculate; (3) infralabials yellow with small black spots; (4) canthoros- trals absent; (5) anteriormost 5–25 subcaudals entire; dis- tal subcaudals divided; (6) ventrals 183–204 and subcau- dals 49–64; (7) loreal subtriangular; (8) canthals narrow; (9) postocular stripe black and 2–3 temporals high; (11) head black with yellow lines forming circular patterns or head yellow with heavy black stippling and marking; supralabials green, heavily speckled in black; dorsum banded and lichenose (Harvey 2005: 29).
Gloydius brevicauda	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Body with a conspicuous pattern of subelliptical blotches (or half-bands) on a light brown or gray ground color; blotches brown, lighter at their center but with dark brown borders, opposite or alternating pairs meeting dorsally at midline or not in contact at all, 3-5 scales wide on sides and extending downward onto scale rows 3 or 2; number of half-bands 23-33 (28.9) in males, 25-36 (30.8) in females (Table 1). Belly black or nearly so, especially posteriorly, lighter laterally; crown and parietal region with conspicuous dark brown markings and a lyriform figure extending backward on neck; cheek stripe strong, dark reddish brown in life, sharply bordered above and below with white, the upper light line extending across top of eye; tongue black; tip of tail light — yellow in life. Internasals wider than long, the posterior margins curving obliquely backward from midline; loreals subquadrate, as high as wide; preoculars 2; postoculars 2 ( 60% ) or 3, the lowest extending forward beneath the eye; supralabials 7 (95%), rarely 8; infralabials 10 (75%), occasionally 9 or 11; posterior supralabials not conspicuously low and narrow. Scale rows 21 at midbody, all with keels posteriorly, lowest without keels anteriorly; paired apical pits present but inconspicuous. Ventrals 135-145 (138.9) in males, 140-149 (143.2) in females; subcaudals 35-44 (40.5) in males, 30-38 (34.9) in females (Table 2) (Gloyd 1972).
Lachesis acrochorda	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: Head tan brown with black postocular stripes (1–2  scales  wide);  supralabials  usually  yellowish  tan  and  spotless; head dorsally marked with irregular spots or “ara-besques”; throat white; body ground color is dark brown to beige usually with 23–31 irregular or incomplete black dorsal rhombuses separated by ivory to dirty white scales, seen later-ally as inverted triangles, and the interior of each rhombus (or triangle) basically the same as the ground color or darker; iris red-brown, becoming darker with age. Ground color in hatchlings and juveniles tan brown to orange-brown, rhombuses or triangles dark brown and usually incomplete, tail pinkish. Head scales are small, barely smooth to tuberculate; dorsals keeled and in 31–39 rows; vertebral and paraverte-bral scale rows very tuberculate, appearing as a vertebral keel; ventral scales in males 204–228, in females 202–221; subcau-dals 46–58 in males, 49–55 in females (Valencia et al. 2016). Valencia et al. (2016) reported maximum total lengths of 2,327 mm for males and 2,342 mm for females in Ecuador. The maximum total length reported for the species is 300 cm (Campbell and Lamar 2004).Lachesis acrochorda and L. stenophrys are externally similar but usually can be distinguished by the latter having 191–209 ventrals (202–228 in L. acrochorda) and usually few if any dark spots on the top of the head (distinctly marked with dark spots and lines or “Ripa’s arabesques” in L. acrochorda; Ripa 1999; Campbell and Lamar 2004). Lachesis acrochordais most similar to L. muta, although Campbell and Lamar (2004)  indicated  that  they  differ  in  body  shape  (L.  muta  round in cross-section, L. acrochorda tall and compressed); however, we cannot corroborate this distinction, as our expe-riences indicated that the body shapes of all congeners can vary in response to different factors (from Barrio-Amorós et zl. 2020).
Ovophis zayuensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis:  third supralabial larger than the fourth, unpaired subcaudals, high ventral scale counts between 158–176. [MALHOTRA et al. 2011, Appendix G]
Crotalus ericsmithi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Distinguished from all other rattlesnakes except C. stejnegeri and C. lannomi in having a long tail (15.9% of TL in adult male holotype) with a tiny rattle (proximal rattle segment 2.2 mm in holotype). Canthals relatively large and separated by two (anteriorly) or a single (posteriorly) small scales (canthals moderately small and sepa- rated by two or three large scales in C. stejnegeri and C. lannomi); intersupraoculars relatively small, 5 (somewhat smaller, 6–8, rarely 5, in C. stejnegeri; large and flat, 4, in C. lannomi); first pair of infralabials mostly separated by the mental (in broad contact in C. stejnegeri and C. lannomi); the second pair of infralabials in broad contact with chin-shields (often excluded or in narrow contact in C. stejnegeri); ventrals 172 in single male (172–178 in male C. stejnegeri); subcaudals 41 (42–45 in male C. stejnegeri); hemipenis with spines on proximal portion of lobes grading abruptly to calyces and large ridged calyces covering apex of each lobe (spines gradually grading to calyces and distal portion of lobe smooth in C. stejnegeri). The type of C. ericsmithi has a longer tail (15.9% of TL) and proportionally smaller rattle (proximal segment 2.2 mm) than any known species of rattlesnake. In C. lannomi the dorsal head and body markings appear to be slightly more boldly outlined in black than the other two species of long-tailed rattlesnakes and the dark lower border of the postocular stripe continues beneath and in front of the eye to merge with the dark border of the snout blotch; the postocular stripe reaches the rictus, whereas it is separated from the rictus by the ultimate supralabial in C. ericsmithi. In C. lannomi the pale bar across the middle third of the supraocular is not well defined and black markings on these scales are irregular. Crotalus lannomi has two (vs. one in C. ericsmithi) occipital spots. Crotalus lannomi differs from C. stejnegeri by having fewer prefoveals (5 vs. 7–8), fewer intersupraoculars (4 vs. 7–8), and fewer middorsal body blotches (31 vs. 34–43). Crotalus lannomi appears to have a somewhat stouter body than either C. ericsmithi or C. stejnegeri.
Bothrops diporus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Prolonged postcephalic stripes present, a resultant coalition of the occipital blotches with the first pair of dorsolateral blotches of the trunk. Supralabials evenly pigmented or with large dark markings (covering more than 50% of the supralabial surface) more conspicuous in the anterior half of the mouth; the largest spot is exactly under the eye. The borders of the dorsolateral blotches have well defined contours. Dorsolateral blotches in the trunk: 10 to 28 (mode 21); usually triangular, wide and close to each other.
Bothrops lutzi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Supralabials ornamented with small white spots prolonged vertically and usually more conspicuous in the posterior half of the mouth. Keels of some dorsal scales with characteristic white coloration. Borders of the dorsolateral blotches of little defined contour, usually forming transverse saddles where it is difficult to see the pair of secondary blotches of the dorsolateral blotches. One array of scales between the subocular and the 4th supralabial. Central intersupraoculars with tendency to the increase or coalesce. Postocular stripe faintly defined. Dorsolateral blotches frequently of trapezoid format, narrow and close to each other, varying from 20 to 35 (modes 21 and 24) [DA SILVA & RODRIGUES 2008].
Bothrops mattogrossensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis - Uniform pigmentation in all the supralabials or big dark markings (covering more than 50% of the supralabial surface) more conspicuous in supralabials of the anterior half of the mouth. When these spots are present, the largest always meet under the eye. Dorsolateral blotches of the body with well defined contours, standing out from the ground coloration. Usually the last dorsolateral blotches of the trunk are divided vertically to the middle. Postcephalic stripes usually absent. When present, never with length larger than occipital length spots. Without melanism in the head. Postocular stripes well defined and keels always with the same coloration of the dorsal scales. Blotches in the interspaces between two consecutive blotches are present. Dorsolateral blotches in the trunk of variable formats from 16 to 33 (modes 21 and 22).
Bothrops pauloensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Postocular stripe well marked, which frequently expands around the labial fissure, developing a melanism on the sides of head. All the supralabials with uniform pigmentation, without conspicuous spots. Oblique occipital blotches rarely surpass quadratemandibular articulation, consequently postcephalic stripes are absent. Borders of the dorsolateral blotches with variable contour: diffuse or well marked. Blotches between two consecutive dorsolateral blotches usually absent. Keels with the same coloration of the dorsal scales. Ground coloration extremely varied, but the cream tone with the black dorsolateral blotches are more common. Dorsolateral blotches of the trunk from 11 to 25 (modes 15 and 17) with variable formats and relatively distant from each other.
Bothrops pubescens	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis - More than half or all the clear supralabials with dark markings (covering less than 50% of the supralabial surface) not very intense triangular format always in the suture between two supralabials. Dorsolateral blotches of well-defined contour, outstanding grayground coloration, still more for the presence of white margins in the principal parts of the dorsolateral blotches. Short postcephalic stripes can be present. Pair of occipital blotches with different formats, but the arrangement usually resembles two opposed arrows pointing to the head sides (“< >”). Melanism in the head absent. Postocular stripe very marked and keels always with the same coloration of the dorsal scales. Dorsolateral blotches in the trunk from 19 to 30 (mode 21) with triangular to trapezoid format and relatively close to each other.
Bothrops marmoratus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis – The new species is distinguished from the 22 species of Bothrops by having a prelacunal not fused to the second supralabial (list in Campbell and Lamar 2004). On the other hand, it shares with fourteen other Bothrops species, the prelacunal separated from the second supralabial. Of these fourteen species of Bothrops, eight do not belong to the complex B. neuwiedi. B. marmoratus is distinguished from B. alternatus by having 5–9 intersupraoculars (vs. 8–13), 21–26 midbody dorsal scale rows (vs. usually 27–33 in B. alternatus), and by lacking a distinctive dorsal pattern of bold, headphone-shaped markings. It differs from B. ammodytoides by not having a canthus rostralis that is characteristically curved upward, and a distinctly raised snout. Bothrops marmoratus differs from B. cotiara and B. fonsecai by not showing conspicuous dark brown occipital stripes extending forward to the snout where they converge, forming a distinctive spear-shaped mark on the top of the head, as well as by having a venter brighter than these two species. It differs from B. erythromelas by having higher counts of midbody dorsal scale rows, ventrals, and subcaudals (19–21, 139–158 and 32–42, in B. erythromelas respectively). It can be distinguished from B. itapetiningae by the higher number of ventrals, and subcaudals (157182, and 32-50 in B. marmoratus vs. 144–160, and 26–38 in B. itapetiningae), from B. jonathani by having 21-26 midbody dorsal scale rows (vs. 30-33), and from Bothrops pictus by not showing dorsal blotches arranged mostly on the middorsum, fusing into a zigzag stripe (Campbell and Lamar 2004).The other six remaining Bothrops species, together with B. marmoratus, belong to the B. neuwiedi complex. In general, they have 4-12 intersupraoculars, 1-2 rows of small scales between the subocular and fourth supralabial, prelacunal separated from second supralabial, 710 supralabials (usually 8-9), 9-13 infralabials (usually 10-11), 21-29 midbody dorsal scale rows, 157-187 ventrals in males, 158-189 ventrals in females, 39-61 divided subcaudals in males, 34-55 in females; often the top of the head with a blotch between the canthals, one pair close to supraoculars, and another pair in the occipital-temporal region; triangular to trapezoidal dorsolateral blotches that alternate or are opposite one another mid-dorsally; between two consecutive dorsolateral blotches there may or may not be one spot or blotch; the base of each dorsolateral blotch has a pair of oval or round blotches, that tend to form a lateral series of blotches typical in the complex; a series of brown or gray paraventral spots may be present; supralabials with some type of ornamentation in color; bronze or bright gold iris, dark pinkish gray tongue; white tail tip in juveniles; white or yellow venter with gray specks scattered throughout, that may form transverse markings throughout the scale sutures; lobes of hemipenis are moderately attenuated, with 28-35 medium to large spines in each one (Campbell and Lamar 2004). Therefore, Bothrops marmoratus may be distinguished from other species of the B. neuwiedi complex mainly through qualitative characteristics (Table 1, Figure 1 in DA SILVA & RODRIGUES 2008). Bothrops lutzi has dark brown or brown supralabials with small vertically elongated white blotches more conspicuous on the posterior half of the mouth, and white keels in many dorsal scales (Figure 1A). Bothrops neuwiedi has dorsolateral blotches with well-defined, white-edged borders, short postcephalic stripes; most supralabials black or dark brown with large, round white blotches (Figure 1B). Bothrops pauloensis has a melanic head, supralabials not finely stippled; posteriormost pair of occipital blotches generally ellipsoidal (Figure 1C). Bothrops mattogrossensis has dorsolateral blotches with well-defined borders, supralabials generally creamish-white with large dark brown blotches that cover most of the supralabials from the anterior half of the mouth; largest blotch is beneath the eye (Figure 1E). Bothrops diporus has postcephalic stripes (much) larger than the occipital blotches; supralabials generally creamish-white with large dark brown blotches that cover most of supralabials throughout the anterior half of the mouth; largest blotch directly under the eye (Figure 1F). In Bothrops pubescens more than half to all supralabials creamish-white with small, triangular dark blotches (covering less than half of the supralabial surface); dark blotches not very conspicuous, lying throughout the suture between two supralabials (Figure 1G).
Metlapilcoatlus indomitus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (from abstract): The new species is easily distinguished from all other members of the genus, except A. picadoi from Costa Rica and Panama, by possessing more ventral scales (140 vs. 3–138). This new species differs from A. picadoi in being relatively small, less than 600 mm in total length (vs. reaching > 750 mm), having the posterior third of the body venter heavily melanized (vs. more than 50%), less than 50% of the underside of the tail melanized, and the postorbital stripe covering more than 50% of only one or two scales from the first temporal row and covering completely only the last scale of the row, at most (vs. 3–4 more than 50% melanized and the last two scales in the row usually completely melanized). In addition to morphological characters, molecular evidence also differentiates this new species from the other species of Atropoides (as recognized by Castoe et al. 2005). Using mitochondrial gene sequence data, they found the new species described herein to represent the sister species of A. occiduus, with 5.7 % sequence divergence separating these two taxa.Diagnosis (from main text): A relatively small terrestrial pitviper (female and male 549 and 573 mm TL, respectively) in which the tail comprises 13.7% of the TL in the single known male and .9% in the single known female. There are 0–1 nasorostrals, 8– intersupraoculars that are distinctly keeled, 23–24 interrictals that are also keeled, –11 supralabials, 11–12 infralabials, 140 ventrals, 37–41 subcaudals (first divided), 24–25 dorsal scale rows at midbody, 26–32 lateral body blotches, and 5–6 tail blotches.Atropoides indomitus can be distinguished from all other known species of Atropoides, except A. picadoi from Costa Rica and adjacent Panama, by having more ventral scales, 140 compared to a maximum of 130, 136, 135, and 116 in males, and 135, 138, 137, and 119 in females of A. mexicanus, A. nummifer, A. occiduus, and A. olmec respectively. Additionally, A. indomitus differs from A. mexicanus, a potentially sympatric species, in having a single scale between the prelacunal and second supralabial (vs. 2 or 3), a single or no nasorostral (vs. 2–4), the rostral apex reaching the canthal ridge, and the postorbital stripe including temporal rows 2 and 3 at midlength (vs. 3 and 4; see Campbell and Lamar 2004: 276, Fig. 91). It differs from A. nummifer, occurring on the slopes of the Sierra Madre Oriental of Mexico, in having the postocular stripe extending up to five scales behind the rictus (vs. usually ending at the ultimate infralabial or no more than two to three scales behind the rictus), in having the anterior two thirds of the body venter nearly immaculate or just finely stippled at the midline (vs. multiple dark ventrolateral blotches extending more than 1/4 the width of the ventrals into the midline), and in having the underside of the tail with some dark pigment, paler towards tip and near vent (vs. nearly completely black in most specimens). Atropoides indomitus can be distinguished further from A. occiduus in having a subocular spot that does not contact the orbit of the eye (vs. contacting orbit), a postorbital stripe including only the last three temporal scales of the first row, with only the posterior one or two scales more than half pigmented (vs. covering completely or almost completely three or more temporal scales of the first row), in having the dark spot below the pit small and only encompassing the prelacunal and anterior part of the postlacunal and the edge of the contiguous foveals (vs. large and encompassing also most of the contiguous foveals and usually even part of supralabials 2 and 3), in having a high number of supralabials, –11 (vs. 8–), in having a high number of subcaudals, 37–40 (vs. 24–36, for both males and females), and in having a nearly immaculate venter or with only slight mid-ventral stippling on the anterior two thirds of the body (vs. multiple dark ventrolateral blotches extending more than 1/4 the width of the ventrals into the midline, a checkered pattern, or at least some heavy mottling on the anterior half of the body). The new species differs from A. olmec by possessing a rostral that reaches the canthal ridge (vs. terminating well below the ridge), one or no nasorostrals (vs. 1–3, 3 being most common), a single scale between the second supralabial and the prelacunal (vs. 2–3), and a high number of subcaudals, 37 in males and 28 in females (vs. 25–33 in males and 25–30 in females). Atropoides indomitus differs from A. picadoi in being smaller (573 mm maximum known TL vs. reaching > 750 mm [Campbell and Lamar 2004]), having 50% or more of the last third of the venter of the body pale (vs. very dark posterior third of body venter, more than 50% melanized), the underside of the tail more than 50% pale (vs. adults with all or most of the tail black), the postorbital stripe covering more than 50% in only one or two scales from the first temporal row, completely only the ultimate, at most (vs. 3–4 and the last two usually completely melanized). Atropoides indomitus has fewer ventral scales than most of its congeners, 140 (vs. 138-155), the female has fewer subcaudals (28 vs. 30–37), whereas the male subcaudal count of 37 overlaps only with that of A. picadoi (34–40) [SMITH et al. 2008].
Atheris mabuensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Atheris mabuensis is distinguished from all other members of the genus by a combination of characters: (1) its small size, maximum length 384mm (all other Atheris exceed 580mm TL, with the exception of - A. katangensis, TL 397mm; A. barbouri, TL 369 mm (Barbour and Howell, 1998); and the unique type of A. acuminata, TL 440mm); (2) the lack of ‘horns’ (enlarged supraocular scales are present in A ceratophora); (3) the lack of lanceolate or acuminate scales on top of the head (present in A. hispida and A. acuminata); (4) having weakly keeled gular scales (smooth only in A. nitschei; gulars moderately keeled in the eastern species, A. rungweensis, A. desaixi, A. ceratophora and A. katangensis, and strongly keeled in the remaining central and western species); (5) lacking interoculabials (sensu Broadley, 1998, i.e. the supralabials are in contact with circumorbitals; 1 or 2 in A. desaixi and A. rungweensis); (6) having 19–21 transverse head scales (sensu Broadley, 1998, i.e. number of scales across head between posterior supralabials; these are reduced in highly arboreal species, e.g. A. squamigera, 15–22, A. hispida, 12; and A. acuminata, 10); (7) having 21–23 MSR (most species have 27+ MSR rows; reduced in highly arboreal species such as A. squamigera, 15–25, A. hispida, 15–19, and A. acuminata, 14); (8) lateral body scales not serrated (strongly serrated in A. ceratophora, A. desaixi, A. nitschei, and A. rungweensis, and weakly serrated in A. katangensis); (9) having 8–9 supralabials (six in A. acuminata, 10–12 in A. desaixi); (10) having low ventral counts 128–137 (this is the lowest in the genus; usually over 140 in both sexes in A. nitschei, A. rungweensis, A. desaixi, A. chlorechis, A. hispida, and A. subocularis, and in the only known males of A. acuminata (160) and A. hirsuta (160); (11) having low subcaudal counts - 39–47 (always higher than 45 in A. rungweensis, A. ceratophora, A. chlorechis, A. squamigera and A. hispida; and 54 and 58 in the only known males of A. acuminata and A. hirsuta, respectively); and (12) having a prehensile tail (non-prehensile in A. barbouri), and higher subcaudal (A. barbouri 15–21) and labial (A. barbouri, supralabials 5–6, infralabials 4–5) counts [from BRANCH & BAYLISS 2009].
Protobothrops trungkhanhensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Extremely small size for Protobothrops, up to 733 mm (SVL adult male is up to 591 mm, Lcd142 mm; SVL female is up to 576 mm, Lcd 123 mm); body slender, slightly compressed; V -188194; Scd - 75 - 76 pairs; anal plate is entire. Scale rows oblique, rhomboid, strongly keeled, including first row of dorsal scales; Sql - 19, Sq2 - 19, Sq3 - 17 rows. The head is very small, triangular and clearly distinct from the neck, covered by very small, convex shields of irregular shape on the upper surface. Supralabials - 8 - 9, infralabials -11 - 12; the first supralabial is clearly. divided from large N; the rostral shield forms isosceles triangle with truncated top; SO - 2 (an terior very large, posterior very small); SubO - I, thin and very long; PrO - 3; PtO - 1; symphysial relatively large, triangular; anterior genial shields very large, posterior genial shields small. Nostril very large, trapeziform. The dorsal coloration of the body and the head of males and females identically are grayish-brown. Across body and tail pass 76 - 84 dark brown bands with rough edges, often broken into separate spots most intensive colored in the middle of dorsum. The belly is dark gray, almost black close-by tail; tip of tail without any elements of red coloration (from ORLOV et al. 2009).
Vipera altaica	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species within the ursinii complex that differs from all other taxa in the complex by the combination of characteristics. It has a small to medium size; non-bilineate ground color; white belly; small lateral blotches and spots present; dark sutures on labials in males; dorsal zigzag band with pointed comers of windings, or with transverse bars; high number of dorsal windings; upper nasal split absent; a squarish rostral; variable loreal number; many circumoculars; upper preocular in contact with nasal; medium number of crown scales; parietals fragmented or not; nine supralabials on each side; posterior supralabials of the same size as anterior ones; fourth supralabial below orbit; ten sublabials on each side; normally four mental scales; somewhat early dorsal scale row reduction compared to renardi; 21 rows on neck and at midbody; a high ventral number; no pronounced exposed intersquamose area; a high number of subcaudals and being a foothill valleys steppe inhabitant. A low mountain species of the ursinii complex characterized by an external morphology normally evolved as typical for mountain taxa of the ursinii complex; similar to European mountain populations (ursin ii, macrops) in some characters and to renardi and Asian mountain populations (eriwanensis) in others but unique to both in combination of characters. It is special in being the smallest taxon, and having the highest number of ventrals within the entire complex; in being a lowland dweller with a color and scalation characteristics typical for mountain taxa, and in having a sharp sexual dimorphism in labial pattern and loreal number. It differs from parapatric renardi by having an earlier dorsal scale row reduction (19 - 21, mean at 90th ventral number) (21 in renardi, with mean scale reduction at 95th ventral number) and a high number of ventrals, which are whitish in color. It differs from European mountain ursinii by having a high number of supralabials. It is separated from most taxa by having partly fragmented parietals (replaced by a mean number of eight scales), banded black suture on supralabials weakly developed or absent, lateral body pattern reduced to squarish rhombic spots that are tilted, dorsal scales are pronouncedly keeled. No interparietalia.
Cerastes boehmei	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: This new species of Cerastes is characterized by: (a) head depressed, eyes on the lateral part of the head but slightly directed upwards; (b) supraocular coronets (crowns) present, consist of several sulcated, medium sized scales, instead of the supraocular horn formed by a single sulcated long scale in C. cerastes or C. gasperettii; (c) nostril slit-shaped; (d) low number of interorbital scales; (e) 19–26–16 dorsal scale rows around fore-, mid- and hind body.
Trimeresurus cardamomensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Cryptelytrops cardamomensis sp. nov. is distinguished from C. venustus, C. honsonensis and C. kanburiensis, by the absence of purple-red marking (banding on the body and blotches on the head). It is distinguished from all other Asian pitviper species which have the typical "green pitviper" colouration (uniform green dorsal colour and a lateral stripe present on the first few dorsal scale rows in one or both sexes), except other species of Cryptelytrops (including C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis), by the presence of a fused first supralabial and nasal scale. It can be distinguished from C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis primarily by the relatively larger size of the eye (most obvious in adults), the relatively wider supraoculars, and the shape of the head. The latter is more elongate–oval in C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis, but widens quite abruptly behind the eyes in C. cardamomensis, C. macrops s.s. and C. rubeus sp. nov. (described below) to give a characteristically triangular shaped head. Cryptelytrops cardamomensis can be distinguished from both C. macrops s.s. and C. rubeus using a combination of the following characters (for further details see Table 2). In males, C. cardamomensis tends to have more scales between the rear edges of the supraoculars (BTWSUPOC2), a relatively larger eye (DEYE), and a more prominent postocular white stripe (SCROC) than either C. macrops s.s, or C. rubeus. Furthermore, compared to C. macrops s.s, the scale reduction from 19 to 17 scale rows around the body (VS19TO17) tends to occur further away from the head, it tends to have fewer (larger) scales bordering the supralabial scales (BORSUPOC), and less keeled temporal scales (KTEMP). Compared to C. rubeus, the scale reduction from 19 to 17 scale rows around the body tends to involve higher (i.e., more dorsal) scale rows (DV19TO17); it tends to have more keeled body scales at mid-body (BSCK), and more scales between the last supralabial and the chin shields (VENTEDGE). In females, the lateral white stripe is much more prominent (STRIPE), always involving the first two dorsal scale rows. Furthermore, it tends to cover a larger proportion of the first scale row (SCR1) than in females of C. macrops s.s. A small scale is present between the nasal scale and the scale bordering the anterior edge of the pit (NASPIT), whereas this is infrequently present in C. macrops s.s. and never present in C. rubeus. Crytpelytrops cardamomensis tends to have more (smaller) scales bordering the supralabial scales (BORSUPOC) than C. rubeus, but fewer (larger) than in C. macrops s.s. The scale reduction from 19 to 17 scale rows around the body (DV19TO17) tends to involve lower scale rows in C. cardamomensis and the fusion between the first labial and nasal scale tends to be more complete (LABNAS) and involve partial sutures on both sides of the nostril (compare Figs. 3, 5 and 7), than in either C. macrops s.s, or C. rubeus. Furthermore, compared to C. macrops s.s, , the scale reduction from 19 to 17 scale rows around the body (VS19TO17) tends to occur further away from the head, it tends to have more scales between the rear edges of the supraoculars (BTWSUPOC2), a higher number of sublabial scales (SUBLAB), and a relatively smaller eye (DEYE). Compared to C. rubeus, it has more keeled body scales at mid-body (BSCK), the scale reduction from 12 to 10 scale rows around the tail (SC12O10) also tends to occur further away from the vent, and there are a larger number of ventral scales in C. cardamomensis females than in C. rubeus females [from MALHOTRA et al. 2011].
Trimeresurus rubeus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Cryptelytrops rubeus is distinguished from all other Asian pitviper species which have the typical "green pitviper" colouration (uniform green dorsal colour and a lateral stripe present on the first few dorsal scale rows in one or both sexes), except other species of Cryptelytrops, by the presence of a fused first supralabial and nasal scale. It can be distinguished from C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis primarily by the larger size of the eye (most obvious in adults), the wider supraoculars, and the shape of the head. The latter is more elongate–oval in C. albolabris, C. insularis and C. septentrionalis, but widens quite abruptly behind the eyes in C. car- damomensis, C. macrops s.s. and C. rubeus to give the latter a characteristically triangular shaped head. Cryptelytrops rubeus can be distinguished from C. cardamomensis sp.nov. (described above) using the combina- tion of the following characters (further details are given in Table 2). In males, C. rubeus tends to have fewer scales between the rear edges of the supraoculars (BTWSUPOC2), a relatively smaller eye (DEYE), and a less prominent postocular white stripe (SCROC). The scale reduction from 19 to 17 dorsal scale rows (DV19TO17) tends to involve lower scale rows, it tends to have less keeled body scales at mid-body (BSCK), and fewer scales between the last supralabial and the chin shields (VENTEDGE). In females, the scale reduction from 19 to 17 dorsal scale rows (DV19TO17) tends to involve higher scale rows in C. rubeus than in C. cardamomensis, it has a relatively shorter head (LHEAD), a small scale is never present between the nasal scale and the scale bordering the anterior edge of the pit (NASPIT), the lateral white stripe covers a larger proportion of the first dorsal scale row (SCR1), it tends to have fewer (larger) scales bordering the supralabial scales (BORSUPOC), and less keeled body scales at mid-body (BSCK). The scale reduction from 12 to 10 scale rows around the tail (SC12O10) also tends to occur closer to the vent in females of C. cardamomensis than C. rubeus and they also have relatively smaller eyes (DEYE). Compared to C. macrops s.s (Table 3), in both sexes C. rubeus has a more prominent lateral stripe with the white area covering a larger proportion of the first scale row (SCR1), less keeled body scales at mid-body (BSCK), and the scale reduction from 19 to 17 dorsal scale rows (VS19TO17) occurs further away from the head. In addi- tion, there are never any small scales present between the nasal scale and the scale bordering the anterior edge of the pit (NASPIT) in C. rubeus, while they sometimes occur in C. macrops s.s. In addition, males tend to have a less prominent postocular stripe (SCROC), fewer sublabial scales (SUBLAB), fewer scales between the rear edges of the supraocular scales (BTWSUPOC2), fewer scales between the last supralabial and the chin shields (VENT- EDGE), and less keeled temporal scales (KTEMP). In females, C. rubeus tends to have fewer ventral scales, fewer (larger) scales bordering the supraoculars (BORSUPOC), and a larger number of scales between the rear edges of the supraoculars (BTWSUPOC2) than C. macrops s.s. [from MALHOTRA et al. 2011].
Trimeresurus sichuanensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (genus Sinovipera and species): A genus of Asian pitviper within Trimeresurus (sensu lato) having the following combination of characters: (1) the first supralabial completely separated from the nasal; (2) a uniform green dorsum without postocular streak and ventrolateral stripes in females; (3) eyes deep red in females; (4) tail prehensile, its end rusty red in upper part; (5) large body size, with the maximum total length exceeding 1000 mm in females.
Protobothrops maolanensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Protobothrops maolanensis sp. nov. differs from other species of Protobothrops by the combina- tion of the following characters: (1) a relatively small body size (TL 609–805 mm); (2) dorsal scales keeled throughout, in 23(rarely 25): 21(19): 17(15) rows; (3) ventral scales 186–193 in male, 190 in female; (4) subcau- dals 78–85 pairs in male, 74 in female; (5) 7–8 supralabials; (6) 11–12 infralabials; (7) 10–12 scales between mid- section of supraoculars in a line; (8) the 4th supralabials separated from suboculars by one row of scales; (9) 68–72 small and thin body bands across body and tail; (10) TaL/SVL ratio 0.238–0.269 in male, 0.190 in female; (11) SL/ HL ratio 0.308–0.326 in male, 0.344 in female; (12) ED/HL ratio 0.164–0.176 in male, 0.152 in female; and (13) the unique color pattern. See YANG et al. 2011 for differential diagnosis by way of comparison with all other species in the genus.
Bothrops ayerbei	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis [original]: “De esta especie se revisaron 20 especímenes, 10 hembras y 10 machos provenientes todos de valle alto del río Patía y pie de monte Oriental de la cordillera Occidental y Oeste de la Cordillera Central en distintos municipios del departamento del Cauca (Mapa 1). Es una serpiente de mediano tamaño con un dorso que consiste de una matriz de 14 a 19 figuras de color negro en forma triangular con bordes de color gris claro ó crema y rematadas en su base por dos manchas redondeadas hacia los vértices inferiores (Figura 9). Entre estos triángulos y sobre los costados se aprecian unas manchas de color gris oscuro ó negras, de forma redondeada u ovalada. A lgunos de estos triángulos pueden unirse por la línea media dorsal formando una figura de corbatín y otras veces están divididos quedando un triángulo en cada uno de los costados; presentan bordes claros (crema) a cada lado del cuerpo (Figura 8), la zona inferior de la boca suele ser de color crema casi blanco y el vientre de color crema moteado de negro mientras que su coloración superior varia de un gris claro a un amarillo grisáceo. El macho mide 110 cm y la hembra 130 cm en promedio, pero hay individuos que llegan a medir 210 cm. La cabeza es más larga que ancha en forma de punta de flecha y se diferencia del cuello; la parte supra cefálica posee una marca particular consistente en un diseño de dos líneas que empieza un poco antes de la base del cuello y se extiende a lo largo de la cabeza formando en ocasiones una especie de triángulo (Figura 7). El ojo es mediano y tiene una pupila vertical. Tiene de 7 a 9 escamas supralabiales, de 7 a 12 escamas infralabiales, 1 escama loreal, 3 escamas preoculares, 4 a 5 escamas postoculares, 24 a 28 filas de escamas dorsales a medio cuerpo, Escamas ventrales en machos 180-203, en hembras 184-215. Escamas subcaudales en machos 58-66, en hembras 56-62, una placa anal única (Tabla 2). Tiene una raya oscura y angosta desde la parte postocular hasta el ángulo de la boca. El cuerpo tiene una forma ligeramente triangular. Las escamas dorsales son quilladas, los termo receptores se encuentran a la misma distancia de los ojos y la fosa nasal y está en contacto con la segunda escama supralabial, la escama mental es más ancha que larga, la escama rostral presenta forma heptagonal, las escamas geneiales se presentan en disposición 2+2.” (Folleco-Fernández 2010).
Trimeresurus mcgregori	Serpentes	Viperidae	DESCRIPTION. Scales on head and chin smooth or irregularly keeled; second upper labial fused to scale forming forming anterior border of facial pit; a distinct light stripe, or at least a series of light spots, present along outer scale row; dorsal color yellow to greenish yellow with darker pigments forming irregular spotted patches along middorsum; tail not distinctly differentiated from body by color; hemipenes without spines (from Leviton et al. 2014: 517).
Montivipera kuhrangica	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Montivipera kuhrangica sp. nov. can be distinguished from other known taxa of the Montivipera raddei group by a combination of meristic and color-pattern characters. In meristic point of view, it can be stated that the new viper has a relatively high fragmentation and as a result high count of head scales compare to other taxa of the Montivipera raddei species group. In addition also strongly projected supraoculars. As is shown in Table 1, Montivipera kuhrangica sp. nov. has higher number of head scales than average in other known taxa, e.g., in intercanthal scales, supralabial and infralabial scales and outer circumocular scales, as well as highest number of intersupraocular rows of scales.In addition the shape of dorsal zigzag blotches in Montivipera kuhrangica sp. nov. is different than other mountain vipers. The dorsal blotches are mostly not tri- angle or rounded but instead often square-shaped. Also toward hind dorsum, there is a tendency to fusion of dorsal blotches to form a straight vertebral line in this new viper. In the Holotype this fusion only has occurred on tail and in the second specimen the fusion of the dorsal blotches can be seen in posterior third of dorsal side of body [from RAJABIZADEH et al. 2011].
Mixcoatlus browni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Definition and diagnosis: Rostral broader than high, front surface flat to moderately concave (M. melanurus); preoculars two (M. barbouri and M. browni) or three (M. melanurus), upper preocular largest and squarish. In M. melanurus, middle preocular separate from supralacunal, lower forming posterior border of pit and excluded from orbit; single, large, flat, plate-like supraocular above eye (M. barbouri and M. browni) or two to three supraoculars along dorsal margin of eye including supraocular horn (single scale above eye forming flattened horn, dorsoventrally compressed in cross section, occupying most of dorsal margin of orbit, tip broadly rounded; adjacent scales along dorsal ocular margin slightly modified, projecting slightly or not); seven to 14 supralabials (usually eight in M. barbouri and M. browni and 11 in M. melanurus); lip margin strongly scalloped in M. melanurus; eight to 13 infralabials; canthals and internasals relatively large, flat to rounded; crown of head covered with relatively large, flat scales with keeling beginning in parietal area (M. barbouri, M.browni) or covered by small keeled scales (M. melanurus); intersupraoculars one (M. browni), three to four (M. barbouri), or nine to 13 (M. melanu- rus); second supralabial discrete from prelacunal (these scales may be separated by two rows of small subfoveals in M. melanurus); supralabial and subocular series in contact (M. barbouri, M. browni) or sepa- rated by two to four rows of small, roundish scales (M. melanurus); one to two postoculars; 17–21 mid- dorsal scale rows; mid-dorsal scales at midbody mod- erately slender and pointed in M.barbouri and M.browni and broad and obtusely rounded in M. melanurus; keel generally extending to tip of scale or nearly so, apical pits not apparent; free portion of apex of dorsal scales moderate in extent; 129–148 ventrals in M. barbouri and M. browni, 137–169 in M.melanurus; subcaudals undivided, 26–35 in M. barbouri and M. browni and 42–64 in M. melanurus; tail spine straight or distally curved upwards, moderately long. In M. barbouri and M. browni dorsum usually with ill-defined zigzag stripe bordered narrowly with black, sometimes broken into discrete blotches; 25–28 dark brown lateral body blotches; dorsal ground colour reddish brown. In M. melanurus dorsum with zig-zag pattern; ground colour reddish brown, olive brown, or grey; dorsal scales usually finely mottled or speckled with black, although this pattern may be apparent only under microscopic examination.In M. barbouri and M. browni lateral edge of nasal bone expanded into roughly triangular shape; frontal bones mostly flat, dorsal surface with slightly elevated margins, longer than wide; postfrontal moderate in size, reaching frontal; transverse distance of postfrontal about equal to its distance along parietal bone; posterolateral edges of dorsal surface of parietals forming moderately distinct raised ridge continuing posteriorly on parietal to about level posterior to quadrate; junction between parietal and pro-otic rounded; squamosal extending posteriorly to level about equal to posterior edge of exoccipital; ectopterygoid much shorter than expanded, flattened base of pterygoid (posterior to the articulation with ectoptery- goid), with flat shaft gradually tapering posteriorly; dorsal edge of palatine rounded. Three palatine teeth; ten to 12 pterygoid teeth; eight to 12 dentary teeth; pterygoid teeth not extending posterior to level of articulation of pterygoid with ectopterygoid; maxil- lary fang relatively short, being about equal in length to height of maxilla; fang at rest extending to level of about middle of supralabial 5.In M. melanurus frontal bones with concave dorsal surface, strongly elevated margins, moderately longer than wide; postfrontals relatively small, not contact- ing frontal, comprising considerably less of dorsal perimeter of orbit than parietals; posterolateral edges of dorsal surface of parietals forming distinct flat shelf not continuing onto the parietal as a raised ridge; junction between parietal and pro-otic irregu- lar, not particularly angular; anterior portion of ectop- terygoid possessing shallow depression on medial side accommodating attachment of ectopterygoid retractor muscle; ectopterygoid noticeably longer than expanded, flattened base of pterygoid (posterior to articulation with ectopterygoid) with flat shaft taper- ing posteriorly; apex of choanal process positioned at about midlength on palatine, process greatly reduced in height, apex broadly rounded; dorsal surface of parietal roughly triangular; three palatine teeth, seven to ten pterygoid teeth, seven to nine dentary teeth; pterygoid teeth extending to level of articula- tion of pterygoid with ectopterygoid; maxillary fang relatively short, only slightly longer than height of maxilla, at rest extending to level of suture between supralabials 6–7 or supralabial 7; splenial and angular bones separate; haemapophyses separate distally.The highland isolation of Mixcoatlus results in its allopatry to most species of pitvipers. However, these three species are sympatric with O. undulatus throughout parts of their range but are distinguished by morphological features listed above. Additionally, M. barbouri and M. browni may be broadly sympatric with Crotalus intermedius and Crotalus ravus but are distinguished from these species by not having a rattle at the end of their tail [from JADIN et al. 2011].
Echis borkini	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Medium and large size efs with a very widened mouth; The dorsal spots have a diagonal shape, they are narrow, strongly extended under the back. (Google translated from Czech translation from Russian by Jiří Hejduk, 2006)Description of the holotype: Body length 500 mm, tail length 55 mm, Ventr. 167, Scd. 31, Sq. 29. The front part of the mouth is very wide. The coloring of the upper side of the body is light brown. The drawing of the head is significantly reduced: only a light spot in the back of the head and a dark ring-shaped part in the middle part of the head have been preserved. The dorsal spots are diagonal, strongly extended under the back, the lateral arcs have been preserved only in the form of small light lines. Each spot of the dorsal complex has two lateral arches flanked by a dark section. This complex has the form of a bright wide transverse stripe. The abdomen is spotless. (Google translated from Czech translation from Russian by Jiří Hejduk, 2006)
Trimeresurus phuketensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus Lacepède, 1804, subgenus Popeia Malhotra and Thorpe, 2004, characterized by (1) hemipenes long, reaching in situ at least the 25th SC, without spines; (2) 1st supralabial distinct from nasal; (3) 23 – 25 DSR around neck about one HL behind head; (4) 21 MSR, keeled; (5) overall col- oration green with reddish-brown crossbands in both males and females; (6) presence of a postocular streak, reddish brown in its wide upper part and white in its nar- row lower part, in both males and females; (7) thin, white (above) and red (below) ventrolateral stripe in males, light green (above) and red (below) ventrolateral stripe in females; (8) rather long tail with a ratio TaLGTL between 0.19 and 0.23 in males and between 0.17 and 0.18 in females; (9) occipital scales smooth or weakly keeled; and (10) temporal scales large, as large as posterior temporals.
Atheris matildae	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Atheris matildae sp. nov. is distinguished from all other members of the genus except A. ceratophora by the presence of two to three very enlarged erect, hornlike, supraciliary scales. It is distinguished from A. ceratophora by the combination of the following morphological and molecular features, based on the data from 69 specimens from all over the known range of A. ceratophora: (1) its larger size, TL of A. matildae type is 643mm (the biggest male A. ceratophora ever recorded does not exceed 510mm TL), (2) higher count of maximum transverse head scales (max. 20 in A. ceratophora, 28 in A. matildae), (3) four subequal suprarostral scales in A. matildae, the two central ones of the same size and the outer ones double in size in A. ceratophora, (4) marked difference in dorsal scale microdermatoglyphic pattern (irregular smooth surface in A. ceratophora, presence of papillae-like ridges in A. matildae), (5) in A. matildae, an extensive black marking across the frontal part of the mouth, including part of nasal, rostral, mental and few infralabial scales is often present, the above described colour feature has not been recorded in the examined A. ceratophora specimens and photographs. Genetic divergence of mitochondrial gene cytochrome b between A. ceratophora collected at type locality and A. matildae expressed as actual substitution difference is 3.18% based on uncorrected p-distance of 0.03180.
Porthidium arcosae	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: “27 Dorsalia in der Körpermitte, 166 Ventralia, 33 einfache Sub caudalia. Prälacunale vom zweiten Supralabiale getrennt. Zeichnung aus rechteckigen Flecken aufgebaut, die teilweise zu querliegenden Bändern verschmelzen; mit feinem hellen Vertebralstrich.” (SCHÄTTI & KRAMER 1993).DESCRIPTION OF THE HOLOTYPE. “Kopf ziemlich langgezogen und dreieckig, Schnauzenspitze leicht aufgeworfen. Internasalia viel länger als breit, bogenförmig angeordnet und rostral zusammenstossend, gefolgt von zwei Canthalia, die hinten an die Supraocularia grenzen; fünf Reihen Schuppen zwischen letzteren. Region zwischen den Internasalia, Canthalia und dem Vorderrand der Supraocularia mit zwölf unregelmässig angeordneten kleineren Schuppen; hintere Kopfschuppen gekielt. Zwei Präokularia, oberes langgestreckt und bis zum Canthale reichend; drei Postocularia. Suboculare schmal; ein bis zwei Reihen zusätzlicher Schuppen zwischen letzterem und den Supralabilia. Neun obere und zwölf untere Labialschilder; zweites Supralabiale vom Prälacunale durch eine Naht getrennt; vorderste Sublabialia in Kontakt; ein Paar Gularia, die mit den vordersten vier Sublabialia in Kontakt stehen. Dorsalia in 27 Reihen um die Körpermitte, 23 eine Kopflänge vor dem Anale; mit Ausnahme der untersten Reihe gekielt; Kiele bis zur Spitze der Schuppen verlaufend. 166 Ventralia und ein Präventrale, Anale einfach, 33 ungeteilte Sub caudalia; GL 570 + 65 mm. Zwei Zähne im Palatinum, deren 11 im Ptergyoid. Grundfärbung graubraun, Zeichnungsmuster mit einer feinen hellen Vertebrallinie und dunkelbraunen Flecken (ca. 23) zu beiden Seiten des Rückens, die teilweise zu Querbändern verschmelzen. Kopfoberseite mit einer dunklen Zone, die lateral von einem hellen Streifen begrenzt wird; dunker Postocularstreif; Oberlippen und Kopfunterseite teilweise aufgehellt. Bauch hell, gegen hinten zu mit dunklen Flecken; Schwanz heller als übriger Körper, ohne Zeichnung (Fig. 4).” (SCHÄTTI & KRAMER 1993).
Cerrophidion sasai	Serpentes	Viperidae	Synonymy: this species has been previously considered as C. godmani.Definition and diagnosis. Similar to all other Cerrophidion species, C. sasai is a medium-sized, blotched terrestrial pitvi- per; head relatively long; distinct and raised canthal ridge, typically two canthals; a large, median frontal plate occupy- ing between 53% and 90% (x = 63.53%) of the distance between the supraoculars; broad supraoculars; nasal divided; prefoveals 0–3; prelacunal single; lacunolabials absent; loreal single; subfoveals 0–2; three preoculars; supralabials 8–10, typically 9 or 10; infralabials 9–12, typically 10 or 11; ventrals 134–146 (x = 138.89), undivided subcaudals 25–34 (x = 29.62) with no significant sexual dimorphism; cloacal scute undivided; tail relatively short and non-prehensile and typically 21 middorsal scale rows. Cerrophidion sasai averages fewer scales in the frontal region, has fewer prefoveals and tends to have a larger median scale in between the oculars than other Central American Cerrophidion species (Campbell & Solórzano 1992; Jadin 2010) [from JADIN et al. 2012].
Cerrophidion wilsoni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Definition and diagnosis. Similar to other Cerrophidion species, C. wilsoni is a medium-sized, blotched terrestrial pitviper; head relatively long; distinct and raised canthal ridge, typically two canthals; a frontal plate; broad supraoculars; nasal divided; prefoveals 1–4; prelacunal single; lacunolabials absent; loreal single; subfoveals 0–2; three preoculars; supralabials 7–11, typically 9; infralabials 10– 12, typically 11; ventrals 137–151 (x = 142.21), undivided subcaudals 23–36 (x = 30.12) with no significant sexual dimorphism; cloacal scute undivided; tail relatively short and non-prehensile; and typically 21 middorsal scale rows. Cerrophidion wilsoni differs from other Cerrophidion species in normally having fewer scales that contact the supraoculars, averaging 9 compared to 10–12 in other Cerrophidion species (Jadin 2010). Additionally, the median frontal scale of C. wilsoni is often quite small, distinguishing it from other Cerrophidion species, and in many individuals the frontal scale is greatly reduced to the size of a normal head scale (Campbell & Solórzano 1992). In those individ- uals that contain a small frontal plate, this plate occupies an average of 36% of the distance between the supraoculars (Campbell & Solo ́rzano 1992) [from JADIN et al. 2012].Similar species. Several other species of pitviper are sym- patric with C. wilsoni at various localities in Honduras. The palm-pitviper Bothriechis marchi is sympatric with C. wilsoni in Parque Nacional Cusuco in the Sierra de Omoa in northwestern Honduras, and C. wilsoni is sym- patric or nearly sympatric with Atropoides mexicanus and Bothrops asper along the lower edges of the cloud forest (Townsend & Wilson 2008), a situation mirrored with the same four species in Reserva de Vida Silvestre Texı ́g- uat in north-central Honduras (Townsend et al. 2012). There may also be sympatric or near-sympatric popula- tions of Bothriechis thalassinus and C. wilsoni in the vicinity of the shared border between Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador. These species are easily distinguished from C. wilsoni by the following characteristics: Bothriechis species have prehensile tails, are typically slender and are mostly green, except certain colour variations in B. schlegelii. The species most closely resembling C. wilsoni are certain pop- ulations of A. indomitus and A. mexicanus but they have broader heads, more numerous distinctly tuberculate sup- racephalic scales, a narrower and longer dark postocular stripe, nasorostrals present and a much stockier body shape [from JADIN et al. 2012].
Bothrops otavioi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The new species is similar to B. jararaca (Fig. 4A, Table 1), and is distin- guished from this latter species by the combination of characters listed below (B. jararaca in parentheses). Smaller adult size in males: range SVL 1⁄4 388–475 mm, n 1⁄4 4 (versus range SVL 1⁄4 635–1000 mm, n 1⁄4 46); few and larger scales at the intersupraocular row: range 1⁄4 three–six scales (versus range five–nine scales); lower number of ventral scales in males: 182–190 (versus 200–211); lower number of ventral scales in females: 185–192 (versus 190–218); lower number of subcaudal scales in males: 54–61 (versus 62– 72); lower number of anterior cephalic scales, generally rounded and with no or feeble keels: range 1⁄4 20–44 (versus range 27–61, generally elongate and distinctly keeled). The hemi- penis of B. otavioi sp. nov. (Fig. 5A) has few diminutive ossified spines bordering calyces and they are restricted to the basal region of the capitulum (versus many small ossified spines reaching the medial region of the capitulum, Fig. 5B); intersulcar region nude (versus intrasulcar region with small ossified spines). Bothrops otavioi sp. nov. is further distinguished from B. jararaca by the absence of diminutive ossified spines from the sulcus spermaticus to the base of the calyces.From B. alcatraz, another small, island- dwelling species, B. otavioi sp. nov., can be distinguished by its lower number of inter- supraocular scales: three–six (versus six–eight scales); higher number of ventral scales in males: 182–190 (versus 173–182); higher number of ventral scales in females: 185–192 (versus 175–186); higher number of subcaudal scales in males: 54–61 (versus 47–54); relatively longer tail in males (ratio TL/SVL 6 SD): 0.169 6 0.010 (versus 0.161 6 0.007) and in females: 0.146 6 0.016 (versus 0.138 6 0.011); relatively longer head in males (ratio HL/TR): 0.057 6 0.004 (versus 0.053 6 0.003) and females: 0.061 6 0.008 (versus 0.055 6 0.003). Bothrops otavioi sp. nov. is distinguished from B. insularis, a larger island-dwelling species of the B. jararaca group, mainly by its brownish color pattern (pale or yellowish in B. insularis), lower number of intersupraocular scales: 3–6 (versus 7–9), lower number of anterior cephalic scales: 20–44 (versus 47–64), and smaller adult size in males: SVL 1⁄4 388–475 mm (versus 393–788 mm). The new species overlaps with B. insularis in number of ventral scales: 182–190 (versus 171–188) in males, and 185–192 (versus 176–195) in females; and subcaudal scales: 54–61 (versus 55–65) in males, and 48–54 (versus 48–59) in females.Regarding haplotype genealogy, Bothrops otavioi sp. nov. is nested within the northern clade of Bothrops jararaca group sensu Grazziotin et al. (2006; Fig. 6). The new species has the most common cytb haplotype within the northern clade of B. jararaca group, sharing the same sequence with populations from Alcatrazes Island, northern Sao Paulo, and the continental coastal slope to lowlands (Fig. 6) [from BARBO et al. 2012].
Crotalus ornatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Crotalus ornatus (Fig. 11) can be distinguished from most congeners by having (1) a medium-sized SVL (adults 70– 100 cm, rarely to 130 cm SVL); (2) two large, triangular internasal scales; (3) two large prefrontals; (4) two large frontal scales; (5) 6– 10 prefoveals; (6) 2–4 loreals; (7) two preocu- lars; (8) five postoculars; (9) 2–7 intersuprao- culars; (10) 16–18 supralabials; (11) 14–21 infralabials; (12) 23–29 dorsal scale rows at midbody; (13) 164–205 ventrals; (14) 16–30 subcaudals (16–26 in females and 21–30 in males); (15) internasal–prefrontal region and supraoculars black or dark brown; (16) dark pigmentation of dorsal pattern extends from nape to occipital and parietal regions; (17) 22– 33 (mean 5 29) rhomboid dorsal body blotches that often coalesce with lateral blotches at midbody to form bands or chevrons (dorsal blotches of some specimens may become diffuse posteriorly, represented by barely distinct or absent bands anterior to vent); (18) light medial spots longer than wide on anterior portion of body, becoming broader at midbody and separating dorsal blotches; (19) medial spots often become indistinguishable from ground color on posterior one-quarter of body; (20) two white or light grey, irregular paraver- tebral spots present within each dorsal blotch, usually separated by 1–6 dorsal scale rows on anterior portion of body, but darken slightly and grow to extend across midline of dorsum to fill interior of dorsal blotches on posterior half of body; (21) tail black or dark brown with faint crossbands sometimes visible; (22) proximal rattle segment black or dark brown (Tables 6–7; from ANDERSON & GREENBAUM 2012).Comparisons.—Crotalus ornatus is unique among C. molossus lineages in having 4–11 prefoveals; 2–7 loreals; a ground color of gray, olive-green, olive-brown, or tan; 22–33 rhom- bic dorsal blotches, each separated by a light gray, white, or pale yellow medial spot; and anterior 6–10 dorsal blotches connected by 1–3 scale rows, often resembling paravertebral stripes or a thick dorsal stripe surrounding light medial spots. Crotalus ornatus most closely resembles C. molossus sensu stricto, but can be distinguished from the latter taxon by its lower average scale counts (P = 0.001) for prefoveals (8 vs. 10) and loreals (3 vs. 4), fewer dorsal blotches (29 vs. 32), and a dorsal blotch pattern where the first 6–10 dorsal blotches are almost always connected (dorsal blotches are almost always separated by a light medial spot in C. molossus sensu stricto). Crotalus ornatus can be distinguished from C. m. nigrescens and C. m. oaxacus by having a higher number of dorsal scale rows at mid- body (27 vs. 25); a higher number of ventrals (up to 205 in females vs. 187 in C. m. nigrescens and fewer in C. m. oaxacus; Klauber, 1972); dark pigmentation on the head restricted to the internasal–prefrontal area, with thin (1 scale row wide), sometimes ornate lines on the occipital and parietal regions (extensive pig- mentation often covers most of the head of the latter two lineages); and light medial and paravertebral spots in the dorsal pattern (usually absent in the latter two taxa). In C. m. oaxacus, it is common for adults to retain black and white tail rings that are typical in juveniles of the C. molossus group (Campbell and Lamar, 1989, 2004), but this character does not persist to adulthood in C. ornatus.Crotalus ornatus is most easily distin- guished from C. estebanensis by geographic distribution; the former is widespread throughout most of the Chihuahuan Desert, whereas the latter is an insular endemic in the Gulf of California. Morphologically, C. orna- tus differs from C. estebanensis in having relatively dark dorsal blotches that boldly contrast with the ground color (dorsal blotch- es are paler and the pattern is moderately contrasting with the ground color in C. estebanensis), and dark pigmentation on the head in the internasal-prefrontal area (absent in C. estebanensis; Grismer, 1999; Campbell and Lamar, 2004). Klauber (1949) noted longitudinal and transverse compression of the rattle of C. estebanensis, which is a unique character among members of the C. molossus group, including C. ornatus.Crotalus ornatus differs from C. totonacus in being smaller (rarely to 130 cm vs. commonly exceeding 150 cm); in having a larger number of intersupraoculars (5 vs. 1 or 2), prefoveals (8 vs. 3 or 4), supralabials (17 vs.14), and infralabials (17 vs. 15); in having an anterior dorsal pattern of interconnected but usually distinct dorsal blotches (paravertebral stripes [usually without distinct blotches] on the neck transition into an intricate pattern on the head in C. totonacus); and by the lack of a vertebral ridge (relatively well-developed in C. totonacus; Campbell and Lamar, 2004, Anderson & Greenbaum 2012).
Bothriechis guifarroi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothriechis guifarroi can be distinguished from the other members of the genus Bothriechis as follows (B. guifarroi features indicated first, those for species compared next): B. aurifer (distributed at moderate and intermediate elevations from extreme east-central Chiapas, Mexico, to east-central Guatemala) — adult color pattern (green vs. black-bordered yellow blotches on green background and prominent black postocular stripe) and juvenile color pattern (green with pale blue blotches or brown with pale paraventral stripe and dark dorsal blotches vs. pale lime green with black-bordered yellow blotches); B. bicolor (occurring marginally at low upward to intermediate elevations from southeastern Chiapas, Mexico, to south-central Guatemala) — number of dorsal scales at midbody (19 vs. 21) and condition of prelacunal and second supralabial scales (fused vs. separate); B. lateralis (moderate to marginally high elevations from northwestern Costa Rica to western Panama) — number of dorsal scale rows at midbody (19 vs. modal number of 23), adult color pattern (green vs. green with pale paravertebral bars and paraventral stripe), and juvenile color pattern (bi-morph pattern of green with blue dorsal blotching or brown with pale paraventral stripe and short unicolor dark blotches vs. uni-morph pattern of brown ground color with pale paraventral stripe and short bicolor dark and pale blotches); B. marchi (found marginally at low elevations up to intermediate elevations in northwestern Honduras and adjacent Guatemala) — condition of prelacunal and second supralabial scales (fused vs. separate), number of subcaudals in females (60–63 vs. 46–57); B. nigroviridis (moderate to intermediate elevations from north-central Costa Rica to west-central Panama) — adult color pattern (patternless green vs. green with very heavy black mottling), juvenile color pattern (green with pale blue blotches or brown with pale paraventral stripe and a series of short darker dorsal blotches vs. green with heavy black mottling), iris color (pale green, pale gray, or pale tan vs. almost black), numbers of ventral scales in both sexes (162–166 and 158–166 vs. 143–158 and 134–158), numbers of subcaudal in both sexes (60–68 and 60–63 vs. 49–56 and 44–58), and condition of prelacunal and second supralabial scales (fused vs. separate); B. rowleyi (moderate to intermediate elevations from extreme southeastern Oaxaca to northwestern Chiapas, Mexico) — condition of prelacunal and second supralabial scales (fused vs. almost always separate), iris color (pale green, pale gray, or pale tan vs. yellow), and juvenile color pattern (green with pale blue blotches or brown with pale paraventral stripe and a series of short darker dorsal blotches vs. pale yellowish green with brown or purple dorsal blotches); B. schlegelii (low to intermediate elevations from northwestern Chiapas, Mexico, southward through Central America and into northwestern South America as far as extreme western Venezuela and extreme northern Peru) — lack of superciliary scales in the former and their presence in the latter, number of suprala- bials (10–12, usually 10 vs. 7–10, usually 8), number of midbody dorsal scale rows (19 vs. 21–25, usually 23), and adult color pattern (green vs. extremely variable color and pattern involving ground color of yellow, pink, brown, gray, or green and dorsal blotching of a sizable array of colors, but sometimes absent; contrasting postocular stripe absent vs. present); B. supraciliaris (moderate to intermediate elevations from southwestern Costa Rica to west-central Panama) — lack of superciliary scales in the former and their presence in the latter, number of midbody dorsal scale rows (19 vs. 21–23, usually 23), number of ventral scales in both sexes (162–166 and 158–166 vs. 145–150 and 141–148), number of subcaudal scales in both sexes (60–68 and 60–63 vs. 48–54 and 45–52), and adult color pattern (green vs. extremely variable color and pattern involving ground color of shades of green, brown, or maroon and dorsal blotching of an array of colors contrasting with that of the ground color; contrasting postocular stripe absent vs. present); B. thalassinus (moderate to intermediate eleva- tions from extreme eastern Guatemala and extreme northwestern El Salvador to west- ern Honduras) — number of midbody dorsal scale rows (19 vs. 21–23, usually 21), and condition of prelacunal and second supralabial scales (fused vs. separate).
Agkistrodon russeolus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: From A. b. bilineatus this subspecies is distinguished by the following attributes: the presence of conspicuous light areas of ground color between crossbands; cheek stripe, bases of crossbands and ventrolateral spots dark chestnut brown, broadly edged with white, the white extending onto ventral scutes; belly light along midline and with numerous white markings irregularly distributed; light lines on sides of head relatively narrow, the upper especially so, the lower extending across the centers of the supralabials anteriorly then descending to their lower margins posteriorly. The white does not extend over the greater part of the supralabials as in A. b. taylori. From A. b. taylori this form is distinguished by the narrow light Une on the supralabials bordered by dark below, and by the higher number of subcaudals. [from Agkistrodon bilineatus russeolus GLOYD 1972]
Protobothrops himalayanus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: This new species is assigned to the genus Protobothrops on the basis of the following characters: 2 large solenoglyph teeth and a loreal pit; dorsal head covered with very small scales; body and tail elongated, thin and cylindrical; DSR 25 at midbody, keeled except the outermost; and distinct transverse bands found across body and tail (Hoge and Romano-Hoge, 1983). Protobothrops himalayanus sp. nov. differs from other species of Protobothrops by the following characters: 1) relatively large body size (TL up to 1510 mm ); 2) DSR 25–25–19; 3) with the exception of the smooth outermost row, dorsal scales are weakly keeled; 4) relatively high number of ventral (198–216) and subcaudal scales (65–76 pairs); 5) 7–8 supralabials; 6) 11 to 13 infralabials; 7) dorsal head uniform dark brown, laterally a reddish- brown obscure postocular streak, starting behind the eye; 8) dorsal body and tail olive, with distinct black edged red brown transverse bands across the body and tail; and 9) eye found from bright brown and reddish brown to mildly brown.
Azemiops kharini	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Viperid medium-sized snake of genus Azemiops, up to 980 mm in body length with a tail. The head is well demarcated from the body by neck interception, noticeably flattened, covered with symmetrical shields. Head has a trapezoidal shape with slightly rounded short snout. Nostril in a single nasal; loreal present; eye relatively small, with vertical pupil. The body is nearly round in cross-section, slightly flattened dorsoventrally, ventrals rounded. Scales smooth, in 17 rows around the middle of the body. Tail short; subcaudals in two rows. Ventrals 183 – 199; anal entire; subcaudals 49 – 51 pairs. Upper surface of head (from the prefrontals) white with two black vertical stripes. Pterygoideum with 14 teeth. Angulare very small, shorter than spleniale and much shorter than dentale. Dentale with 15 – 16 teeth. Quadratum long, directed downward and backward, and articulates with pterygoideum which bears 14 teeth. 186 – 201 trunk vertebrae, 46 – 51 caudal vertebrae. Hypopophyses developed on all trunk vertebrae, they are much shorter than the spinous processes. Parapophyses without long ventral processes. Parietale broadly rounded on the sides along its entire length, the greatest width is recorded in the back part of the bone without a median ridge.A. kharini can be distinguished from A. feae by the shape of the basisphenoid (Fig. 5H) and the basioccipital (Fig. 6A). The basisphenoid of A. kharini has the same shape of the anterior part of this bone as in A. feae, but in A. kharini the bone is shorter, missing widened posterior part. The basiccipital of A. kharini has no tubercles on the anteroventral part, while in A. feae there are two tubercles there. In addition, A. kharini has lower medial process of the compound bone. [Snetkov & Orlov 2017].
Vipera anatolica	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (senliki): A small viper (SVL < 40 cm, tail length < 6 cm) closely related and resembling to the Anatolian meadow (mountain steppe) viper Vipera anatolica Eiselt and Baran, 1970. Based on 19 Vipera a. senliki ssp. nov. from Mühür Daǧ and 7 Vipera a. anatolica from Kohu Daǧ (increased to 14 concerning colour pattern characters only, see Material and methods), Vipera a. senliki ssp. nov. differs from the nominotypic subspecies by: (1) significantly more anterior dorsal scale rows with mostly (90%) 21 dorsal scale rows behind the head (vs. 18 or 19 rows in V. a. anatolica); (2) higher ventral scales count with a mean of 122.11 (vs. 118.27 in V. a. anatolica); (3) smaller number of infralabials with mostly 9 scales (vs. 10 in V. a. anatolica); (4) fewer circumoculars with mostly 9 scales (vs. mostly 10 in V. a. anatolica); (5) fewer loreals with mostly 4 scales (vs. mostly 5 in V. a. anatolica); (6) a relatively wider head, i.e. lower ‘head length/head width’ ratio (7) showing a higher number of interruptions of the mid-dorsal zig-zag band (NIZB) between the head and the dorsal position of the anal plate, with 5- 22 interblotch-spaces lacking any clear dorsal-band connection (vs. 0-4 inter- ruptions in V. a. anatolica). Interruptions are defined as the lack of dark dor- sal colour (brownish to blackish) visibly connecting two mid-dorsal blotches, but not counting scales with only very light suffusion by speckling or with dark colour only along the edges of those scales or adjacent interscalar skin; (8) showing a remarkable reddish colouration of subcaudals (CSC) in 90% of females and 40% of males (vs. none or light brownish in the two female and five males of V. a. anatolica). (9) dorsal colouration of tail tip (DCTT) yellow in 90% of individuals, includ- ing adults (vs. grey ground colour in V. a. anatolica with yellow being present only on the subcaudal part of the tail tip); (10) darker pileus colouration (PC), as all individuals exhibit an increased speckling and/or darker ground colour anterior to the head angle marks (= pileus colouration), visibly contrasting with the lighter body posterior that blotch (vs. only ca. 40% in V. a. anatolica show a darker PC); (11) a decreased frequency of drop-shaped head angle marks (DSHA), with 90% of the angle marks evenly ended and only two individuals show one angle slightly wider (drop shaped) on the parietal side (vs. wider half on parietal side for both angle marks present in ca. 60%, only one side in ca. 30%, and none in ca. 10% of V. a. anatolica).
Ovophis convictus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: larger third than fourth supralabial, paired subcaudals, distinguished from other species sharing these character states by particularly low ventral (120–139) and subcaudal scale counts. [MALHOTRA et al. 2011, Appendix G]
Crotalus armstrongi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Crotalus triseriatus armstrongi can be distinguished by its pale gray, reddish brown, brownish yellow, or yellowish green ground color from C. t. triseriatus which has a dark gray or dark grayish brown dorsum. In C. t. armstrongi the body blotches tend to be as wide orwider than long while in C. t. triseriatus the blotches are usualIy Ionger than wide. Crotalus t. armstrongi further differs from C. t. triseriatus in that males (N=3) generally have fewer ventrals and subcaudals, 130-138 (134.3) and 24-26 (25.3), respectively, as compared to 136-151 (144.0) and 26-34 (29.2), respectively. Crotalus t. armstrongi can be distinguished from C. t. aquilus by having a distinct postocular stripe, a proportionally smaller rattle, and in males possessing fewer ventrals (the number usually exceeding 145 in C. t. aqutlus). Crotalus t. armstrongi females (N= 6) generally have fewer ventrals, 138-146 (142.0), and more subcaudals, 22-25 (23.5) than female C. t. aquilus which have 143-160 (151.7) ventrals and 17-23 (20.4) subcaudals. The only other rattlesnake with which C. t. armstrongi may be confused is C. pusillus, but it may be easily distinguished from this form by its having fewer ventrals and subcaudals,fewer pterygoid teeth, and canthals that fall to make contact with each other (Campbell 1979: 366).
Crotalus tlaloci	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Crotalus tlaloci can be distinguished from all members of the C. triseriatus species group by the combination of the following characters: (1) presence of intercanthals, (2) undivided upper preocular, (3) 152–164 ventrals in males, 156–165 in females, (4) 27–33 subcaudals in males, 22–32 in females, (5) small rattle (proximal rattle width 11.1–14.5% of head length), (6) long tail (8.9–11.3% of total body length in males, 8.0–10.7% in females), (7) usually two pairs of symmetrical, similarly sized intercanthals, and (8) dark postocular stripe that noticeably narrows before reaching the posterior of the eye.Crotalus tlaloci is most similar to species of the C. triseriatus group distributed along the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt. Crotalus tlaloci is distinguished from these species by the presence of intercanthals (lacking in C. pusillus), undivided upper preocular (divided 14.3% of the time in C. armstrongi and 9.4% of the time in C. triseriatus), high number of ventrals (overlapping with C. pusillus, but mean number in C. tlaloci higher than C. pusillus: 156 vs. 154, respectively), high number of subcaudals (mean number in females higher than in C. pusillus, C. armstrongi, and C. triseriatus: 28 vs. 26, 24, and 24; in males, higher than in C. armstrongi and C. triseriatus: 30 vs. 28 in both), proportionately small proximal rattle (mean width smaller than in C. armstrongi and C. triseriatus: 12.8% of head length vs. 14.0% and 15.8%), and proportionately longer tail (mean length in females higher than in C. pusillus, C. armstrongi, and C. triseriatus: 9.2% of total length vs. 8.6%, 8.3%, and 8.3%). Most specimens (10/12) possess two pairs of symmetrical, similarly sized intercanthals, creating the appearance of butterfly wings. Of the 100 specimens in the C. triseriatus group that we examined, this symmetrical paired arrangement of intercanthal scales in the prefrontal region (“butterfly wings”) was observed in only one other specimen (C. armstrongi, CNAR 4498). Crotalus tlaloci also possess a dark postocular stripe that noticeably narrows before reaching the posterior of the eye. In C. pusillus, C. armstrongi, and C. triseriatus, the postocular stripe is generally of uniform width, although on rare occasions in C. pusillus and C. armstrongi it tapers slightly before reaching the eye.
Crotalus campbelli	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Crotalus campbelli can be distinguished from all members of the C. triseriatus species group except C. armstrongi by the combination of the following characters: (1) presence of intercanthals, (2) infrequently divided upper preocular (9.1% of the time), (3) 150–154 ventrals in males, 147–152 in females, (4) 31–32 subcaudals in males, 22–26 in females, (5) small rattle (proximal rattle width 11.0–14.6% of head length), (6) long tail (9.1–11.0% of total body length in males, 7.5–8.9% in females), (7) pale interspaces between dorsal and lateral blotches, (8) heavy venter mottling, (9) dark proximal rattle and underside of tail, and (10) usually a single large anterior intercanthal. Crotalus campbelli can be distinguished from C. armstrongi based on higher mean number of ventrals (152 in males and 149 in females vs. 141 and 144), higher mean number of subcaudals in males (31 vs. 28), less frequently divided upper preocular (9.1% vs. 14.3%), proportionately longer tail in males (10.3% of total body length vs. 9.7%), smaller mean proximal rattle width (13.0% of head length vs. 14.0%), higher mean number of dorsal blotches (48 vs. 42), and higher number of tail bands (mode of 9 vs. 6).Crotalus campbelli is most similar to members of the C. triseriatus group distributed along the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt, including C. pusillus, C. armstrongi, C. triseriatus, and C. tlaloci. Crotalus campbelli is distinguished from C. pusillus by possessing intercanthals and an infrequently divided upper preocular, from C. tlaloci by having an infrequently divided upper preocular, variable number of intercanthals, fewer ventrals (in females, 147–152 vs. 156–165; in males, mean number 152 vs. 156), lower mean number of subcaudals in females (24 vs. 28), proportionately shorter tail in females (8.2% of total length vs. 9.2%), and higher mean number of dorsal blotches (48 vs. 43), and from C. triseriatus by a higher number of ventrals (in males, 150–154 vs. 134–146; in females, mean number higher: 149 vs. 142), higher mean number of subcaudals in males (31 vs. 28), proportionately smaller proximal rattle (13.0% of head length vs. 15.8%), and by having pale interspaces between dorsal and lateral blotches. Crotalus campbelli is most similar in general appearance to C. armstrongi, but can be distinguished from this species by characters mentioned above. Half of the specimens of C. campbelli also possess a single, large anterior intercanthal. This scale arrangement is rarely seen in C. armstrongi and C. triseriatus. Crotalus campbelli is easily distinguished from C. ravus by the lack of large head plates in the parietal region.
Montivipera bulgardaghica	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Nilson & Andreen 1986: 45
Ovophis makazayazaya	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS (DIAGNOSTIC CHARACTERS).— Body stout; snout short, a little more than twice the length of the diameter of the eye; head covered above by small scales rather than large shields, scales usually smooth, feebly imbricate; first upper labial not fused to nasal, completely separated by a suture; body scales, smooth or weakly keeled, in 23–25, occasionally 19 or 21 longitudinal rows at midbody; supraoculars large, 5–9 scales in a line between them; internasals usually not in contact with one another, separated by 2 small suprapostrostral scales; 7–10 upper labials, second usually fused to the scale bordering the facial sensory pit anteriorly, fourth and fifth beneath eye but separated from orbit by 2–4 series of small scales; ventrals and subcaudals (Myanmar, northeastern India and adjacent areas of China and Thailand) 137–176 and 36–62 respectively, subcaudals mixed paired and single, occasionally all unpaired (ventrals and subcaudals for southern China, Vietnam, Laos: 127–144 and 36–54, and Malaysian Peninsula: 133–137 and 22–28 respectively [fide Smith 1943:509]). Total length males 490 mm, females 1100; tail length  males 80 mm, females 150 mm. [after LEVITON 2003]Diagnosis: the fourth supralabial larger than the third, paired subcaudal scales, 131–155 ventral scales. [Malhotra et al. 2011]
Trimeresurus gunaleni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A large species of pitviper of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by the combination of (1) body elongate, head long and massive in adults; (2) an overall green coloration with interstitial skin forming irregular, hol- low, black dorsal crossbands, with a thin, pale ventro- lateral line; (3) 21 DSR at midbody; (4) first supralabial totally separated from nasal scale; (5) large internasals, most usually separated by one scale, only exceptionally in contact; (6) three supralabials, third, fourth, fifth SL in contact with subocular; (7) supraoculars large but elon- gate, separated by 5–7 cephalic scales; (8) tail long, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.201 and 0.210 in males and 0.144 and 0.180 in females; (9) 162–179 VEN; (10) 58– 72 SC (males: 71–72; females: 58–66); (11) eye yellow- ish-green in life and preservative; (12) cephalic scales strongly and broadly edged with black but not forming streaks; (13) no black postocular streak; (14) venter greenish-yellow or pale green, uniform, with posterior margin of ventrals paler green; and (15) tail greyish-red, rusty brown or reddish-brown, mottled with green cross- bars anteriorly.Main characters separating T. gunaleni spec. nov. from other taxa of the complex of T. sumatranus are summarized in Table 2. Trimeresurus gunaleni spec. nov. mainly differs from T. sumatranus by (1) a lower number of ventrals in males (162–179, x̅ = 168.4 vs. 178–185, x̅ = 181.5; U = 33.5, P < 0.005) and females (164–171, x̅ = 169.5 vs.175–191, x̅ = 183.3); (2) a higher value of the ratio TaL/TL in males (0.201–0.210, x̅ = 0.206 vs. 0.150– 0.168, x̅ = 0.161); (3) the color of the tail with hues of red throughout mottled with green crossbars anteriorly vs. green as the body on its anterior half, becoming more or less abruptly red (see above description) posteriorly, strongly reticulate with black; (4) the color of the eyes: green or yellowish-green in T. gunaleni spec. nov. vs. dark brown, dark grey, or bronze in T. sumatranus; (5) the color of the ventral scales, which are green with a paler posterior margin in T. gunaleni spec. nov. vs. pale green with a dark grey or black posterior margin in T. sumatranus.Trimeresurus gunaleni spec. nov. differs from T. mal- colmi by (1) the number of dorsal scales around mid- body (21 vs. 19); (2) a higher value of TaL/TL in males (0.201–0.210, x̅ = 0.206 vs. 0.160–0.179, x̅ = 0.162, s = 0.009); (3) the presence of a white lateral stripe in T. gunaleni spec. nov., missing in T. malcolmi; (4) the color of the tail: greyish-red, rusty brown or reddish-brown, mottled with green crossbars anteriorly in T. gunaleni vs. greenish-orange, salmon or pinkish-red, strongly reticu- lated with black in T. malcolmi; below, the tail is yellow- ish green anteriorly, turning to brown posteriorly in T. gunaleni spec. nov. vs. green or greenish-yellow on its anterior half, with subcaudal scales broadly edged with black producing a conspicuous reticulation; (5) the color of the eyes: yellowish-green in T. gunaleni spec. nov. vs. dark grey in T. malcolmi.Trimeresurus gunaleni spec. nov. differs from T. hageni by (1) a lower number of ventrals in males (162–179, x̅ = 168.4 against 177–189, x̅ = 181.8; U = 139.5, P < 0.001) and females (164–171, x̅ = 169.5 vs.176–196, x̅ = 186.7); (2) by the internasals being separate (in eight out of nine specimens) against being most usually in contact in T. hageni (in 66 out of 73 specimens; U = 545.5, P < 0.001); (3) by the number of supralabials, usually being nine (in 14 out of 18 cases, only exceptionally 8 or 10, x̅ = 9.11) in T. gunaleni spec. nov. vs. usually 10 or 11 (in 123 of 148 occurrences, exceptionally 9, 12, or 13, x̅ = 10.54; U = 637.0, P < 0.001) in T. hageni; (4) by the total number of supralabials (on both sides) touching the subocular, six (in one case in seven, x̅ = 6.1) vs. usually being 2–4 (in 56 out of 74 cases, exceptionally 0, 1, 5, 6, x̅ = 2.9; U = 632.0, P < 0.001) in T. hageni; (5) by the number of infralabials, usually 11 (in 11 out of 16 occur- rences, only exceptionally 10 or 12, x̅ = 10.93) vs. usu- ally 12–14 (in 120 of 148 cases, exceptionally 11, 15, or 16, x̅ = 13.08; U = 710.0, P < 0.001) in T. hageni; (6) the lack of a pale temporal streak in T. gunaleni spec. nov., usually present in T. hageni, especially in males (in 27 of 29 males of T. hageni); and (7) the missing of dorsolat- eral white dots in T. gunaleni spec. nov., are usually present in T. hageni especially in males (in 27 of 29 males of T. hageni).
Crotalus angelensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A subspecies of Crotalus mitchelli differing from the other subspecies in its larger size, proportionately larger head in adults, smaller initial rattles, greater number of dorsal scale rows, higher number of ventral scutes, greater frequency of supraoculars with sutures, larger and fewer scales between the prenasals and rostral, and higher number of middorsal blotches on the body. In nearly all of these characters there is some overlapping with the mainland subspecies, but the differences are statistically significant (Klauber 1963: 75).
Ophryacus smaragdinus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Ophryacus smaragdinus can be distinguished from all other pitvipers in North America by the combination of the following characters: absence of a rattle; divided subcaudal scales; presence of a supraocular horn that is not in immediate contact with the eye; fewer than 30 interrictal scales; and usually fewer than 10 supralabials on each side of the head (Fig. 2). A distinctive white, cream, or pale yellow triangular marking is present on the lateral surfaces of the head, starting just below the suboculars and extending diagonally onto the 5th and 6th supralabials; this pale marking often extends onto the 7th and 8th (if present) supralabials. Secondary pale markings also are present on the 1st and 3rd supralabials, whereas the color of the 2nd and 4th supralabials is the same as the  ground color of the head. This pale-colored triangular marking and the associated secondary pale markings are diagnostic for this species, and when viewing photographic material are helpful in distinguishing it from its congeners (Fig. 9A, B, C in Grünwald et al. 2015).Comparisons: Ophryacus smaragdinus is morphologically similar to O. undulatus and species of the genus Mixcoatlus, including M. melanurus, M. browni, and, to a lesser degree, M. barbouri. Ophryacus smaragdinus can be distinguished from O. undulatus by the presence of a supraocular horn that is separated from the eye by one or two rows of small supraocular scales (Figs. 2A, 9A, B, C), as well as by the presence of fewer supralabials (often seven or eight on at least one side, but no more than 10), whereas in O. undulatus usually 11 or more are present on each side, but no fewer than nine. In O. smaragdinus 1–4 postrostral internasals are present, followed by a row of 5–7 anterior intercanthals, all of which are small and distinctly keeled. In contrast, 2–3 postrostral internasals are present in O. undulatus, which lack a keel and are followed by a row of 5–7 anterior intercanthals, of which the outer ones are large and flat and the smaller inner scales are slightly keeled. In O. smaragdinus 22–29 interrictals are present, whereas in O. undulatus there are 31–36. The upper preocular in O. smaragdinus is shorter than in O. undulatus, with a length of 25–50% of the eye diameter, compared to 70% or more in the latter species (Figs. 9, 10). The condition of the canthals also differs in the two species; whereas they might be prominent in both, the canthals of O. smaragdinus are rounded and slightly elevated, but those in O. undulatus are pointed and raised into horns (Figs. 9, 10). Finally, although the coloration of both species is variable, individuals of O. smaragdinus can be distinguished from those of O. undulatus by the presence of a white, cream, or pale yellow triangular marking that extends from the posterior portion of the eye diagonally onto the 5th and 6th supralabials. This triangular marking is not present in O. undulatus (Figs. 4, 9). See Table 1 here and below for a comparison of the distinctive characters among the various species.Ophryacus smaragdinus can be distinguished from O. undulatus from the Pacific versant of the Sierra Madre del Sur, Oaxaca (Ophryacus sphenophrys new comb.; see below) by the presence of a supraocular horn that is not in immediate contact with the eye, and which is taller than wide (Fig. 2). In O. undulatus from the Pacific versant of the Sierra Madre del Sur, Oaxaca, the horn is wider than tall and in contact with the eye (Figs. 6A; 10C, D). Furthermore, four characters also are useful in distinguishing the two species. Values for O. undulatus from the Pacific versant of the Sierra Madre del Sur, Oaxaca follow those for O. smaragdinus: a shorter tail in males (less than 15% of SVL, compared to over 17%), fewer supralabials (usually 7–9, vs. 10), fewer interrictals (22–29, as opposed to 33), and fewer subcaudals (39–46, as opposed to 51–57). Ophryacus smaragdinus can be distinguished from M. melanurus by the presence of divided subcaudals, a supraocular horn that is separated from the eye by one or two rows of small supraoculars, and fewer supralabials (7–9 vs. 10–14 in M. melanurus). Furthermore, M. melanurus is gray and not green, whereas O. smaragdinus is green or brown and not gray (Fig. 4). Ophryacus smaragdinus can be distinguished from the other two species of Mixcoatlus by the presence of supraocular horns, as well as by the number of intersupraoculars (11 in O. smaragdinus vs. 1 in M. browni and 3–4 in M. barbouri (Figs. 9, 10). Additionally, in O. smaragdinus one or two scales are present between the subocular and the supralabials, whereas in M. browni and M. barbouri the suboculars are in contact with the supralabials (Figs. 9, 10). 
Ophryacus sphenophrys	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Supraocular protuberant, wedgeshaped, hornlike, base almost twice as long as projecting part; subcaudals divided, 57; ventrals 171; two rows of scales between orbit and labials; ten scales across top of head between supraocular horns; scales bordering pit ventrally in contact with labials; pattern of two rows of dark paired rectangular spots on each side of body.Description of holotype. Head fat, much wider than neck; dorsal head scales with a low keel, those at sides with a protuberant keel; six scales from rostral to supraocular, next to canthal ridge; two small internasals bordering nasals laterally, rostral anteriorly and each other medially; a protuberant supranasal, as large as internasals; four scales conacting internasals posteriorly between supranasals; posterior to this row, another row of six scales, slightly larger than any other on snout, between canthals; two canthal scales between nasal and preocular; a large upper and a small lower preocular above meatus putealis; nasal large, in contact with supranasal and first labial, divided below nostril, separated from anterior pit scale by four or five very small scales; three scales bordering pit, anterior very large and in contact with first and second labials; rear ventral pit scale in contact with second and third labials; upper rear pit scale bordering both preoculars and both canthals; one small superciliary (or cantal) dorsal to preocular, bordering large supraocular posteriorly; base of latter scale, at attachment to head, as long (3 mm.) as eye, but placed somewhat forward of center of eye; 1-2 scales bordering eye above, posterior to supraocular; supraocular projecting half its basal length (1.5 mm.) over eye; two rows of scales between eye and labials, the scales in lower row as large as second supralabial, 2-3 very small scales scattered between rows; lower row of temporals as large as or larger than supralabials, heavily keeled; temporal scales becoming gradually smaller and less heavily keeled dorsad, in about five rows; parietals decreasing in size mediad, about ½ to ⅓ size of scales on top of snout back as far as rear interorbital level; ten scales (in least count, obtainable via several rows) across top of head between supraocular horns; supralabials 10-? (several fused below eye on one side), second smallest; a sharp indentation (possibly an artifact) in anterior part of upper lip, apex at suture between first and second supralabials; 14-14 infralabials, first in contact medially, first three in contact with chinshields; one pair of chinshields, reaching level of rear edge of fifth infralabial. Scale rows 21-21-15; 171 ventrals; anal entire; 57 caudals, all divided. Total length 461 mm., tail 75 mm. Pattern of two rows of small elongate rectangles on each side of body, the rhombs of the dorsal row in some areas staggered, in others coincident and fused (see plate); light areas at sides of body between blotches pinkish; dark markings a brownish gray, whole snake of pastel appearance, not intensely colored. Venter moderately pigmented; encroaching on edges of ventrals a series of distinct, incompletely darkedged, oval light spots, each covering the area of about three lateral scales and extending onto second scale row, one placed at about every sixth ventral; subcaudal surface somewhat darker than belly; throat lighter than rest of venter; four or five dark marks in a row along lower labium.” (Smith 1960)Comparisons. Bothrops undulatus is most closely similar to sphenophrys; no other species could be confused with it. Differences between the two are numerous. Most conspicuous is the shape of the supraocular horn. In undulatus the horn is slender, elongate, and cylindrical, like a pinfeather, with a diameter at base one third to one half its projecting length. In sphenophrys the horn is large, wedgeshaped, its diameter at base twice its projecting length and almost the length of eye. The scales on top of head in undulatus are relatively small; three postrostral internasals (not 2); five to six scales in row behind internasals (not 4); 13-15 scales (least possible count) between horns (not 10); 3-4 rows of scales between eye and labials (not 2); one row of scales between pit border scale and labials (not 0); ventrals 149-166 except type with (?) 171 (171 in sole known sphenophrys) ; caudals 41-49 (not 57). The existence of pattern differences is uncertain. Specimens at hand of undulatus (3) are extremely darkly pigmented above, showing dim evidence under fluid of median rhombs here and there fused and split so as to form a strongly undulant median stripe; the single juvenile has oval light spots along sides of body much as in sphenophrys. The belly and subcaudal surface likewise are more darkly pigmented than in sphenophrys. More specimens are necessary to provide confidence in the constancy of the vague differences now suggested in color and pattern. Although I have not re-examined the type of undulatus, the figure of the head of the type given by Jan (1859, Prodrome Icon. Gen., pl. E) clearly shows the very distinctive, slender, protuberant supraocular horn characteristic of the species with which the name undulatus has been associated in subsequent literature, including the present paper.” (Smith 1960)
Gloydius rickmersi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A slender, moderately stout small snake of the genus Gloydius, with up to 479 mm total length. Head slender, slightly triangular, with nine symmetrical plates on the upper head, 7 supralabial and 8-9 infralabial scales. Body scales in 20-22 rows around midbody, 143- 156 ventral and 35-45 usually paired subcaudal scales. Cloacal plate not divided. Body, excluding the tail, with 26-29 transverse crossbands, not extending to the sides of the body.Comparisons: The new species is distinct to all other species of the genus in the combination of the following characters: a slightly lower number of scale rows around midbody (20-22 versus mainly 23, sometimes 21); a low number of transverse body cross-bands (26-29 versus above 30 in all taxa beside G. himalayanus and the G. blomhoffii complex), the mean number of ventral scales (150 which is higher than in most of the G. blomhoffi taxa, but distinctly lower than in the G. halys-intermedius complex); and its small size (479 mm total length versus more than 600 mm is most species, apart from G. b. dubitatus, G. b. ussuriensis, G. h. halys and G. h. caucasicus which are about the same maximum total length, and G. monticola and G. strauchi which are smaller). In details, the new species is distinct to taxa of the Gloydius blomhoffi complex generally by the lack of apical scale pits, but as well by having a higher number of ventral scales (mean 150 versus 140.7 in G. b. blomhoffii, 140.1 in G. b. dubitatus, 141.1 in G. b. brevicaudus, and 140.1 in G. b. siniticus; but apart from G. ussuriensis with 151.2); in having a lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 10.4 in G. b. blomhoffii, 10.0 in G. b. du- bitatus, 10.0 in G. b. brevicaudus, 10.1 in G. b. siniticus, and 9.8 in G. ussuriensis); in having a higher or somewhat equal number of cross-bands on the body (mean 27.5 versus 19.9 in G. b. blomhoffii, 29.9 in G. b. dubitatus, 29.9 in G. b. brevicaudus, 30.1 in G. b. siniticus, and 28.7 in G. ussuriensis); and by having a very indistinct coloration of crossbands versus very distinct crossbands in this complex. The new species is distinct to taxa of the Gloydius intermedius complex (according to the concept of Gloyd and Conant, 1990) by the absence of apical scale pits; in having a lower number of scale rows around midbody (mean 21 ver- sus 22.8 in G. intermedius and G. saxatilis); in having a lower number of ventral scales (mean 150 versus 158.5 in G. intermedius and 156.8 in G. saxatilis); and a lower number of body crossbands (mean 27.5 versus 36.9 in G. intermedius and 38.7 in G. saxatilis). Furthermore, the new species is distinct to all taxa of the Gloydius halys complex in having a lower number of scale rows around midbody (20-22 [mean = 21] versus usually 23 rarely 21 or 25), and very narrow indistinct crossbars along the body not extending to the lateral sides (versus distinct cross-bars and extending to the flanks in most taxa) (see table 2). The new species is distinct to G. h. halys by a lower number of ventral scales (143- 156, mean 150 versus 164-178, mean 172); by a lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 10.7); a lower number of body cross- bands (mean 27.5 versus 38.4); and a distinct coloration (body crossbands not extending to the flanks versus extending to the flanks). The new species is distinct to G. h. boehmei by its higher number of subcaudal scales (35-45 ver- sus 35); its lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 11); and a lower number of body crossbands (mean 27.5 versus 41). Apart from the above mentioned characters, the new species is somewhat similar in coloration to G. h. caraganus, but distinct in its lower number of ventral scales (143-156, mean 150 versus 149- 167, mean 158); by its lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 10.8); and by its lower number of body crossbands (mean 27.5 versus 44.4). The new species is distinct to G. h. caucasicus by its slightly lower number of ventral scales (mean 150 versus 157); the lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 11); a lower number of body crossbands (mean 27.5 versus 36.4); a distinct coloration (body crossbands not extending to the flanks versus extending to the flanks); and by the absence of apical scale pits. The new species is distinct to G. h. cognatus by its slightly lower number of ventral scales (mean 150 versus 159); the lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 10.2); a lower number of body cross-bands (mean 27.5 versus 35.9); and a distinct coloration (body crossbands not extending to the flanks versus extending to the flanks). The new species is distinct to G. h. stejnegeri by slightly lower number of ventral scales (mean 150 versus 156); the lower number of infralabial scales (mean 8.5 versus 10.7); a lower number of body crossbands (mean 27.5 versus 31.6); a distinct coloration (body crossbands not ex- tending to the flanks versus extending to the flanks); and by the absence of apical scale pits.
Bitis harenna	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A Bitis of the subgenus Macrocerastes (sensu Lenk et al. 1999) that differs from all other species except B. parviocula in lacking horns between the nostrils, in having less than four scales between the rostral and first supralabial, and in having a pale cross bar on the dorsal surface of the head behind the eyes (Figs. 1, 2). Differs from all other species of the subgenus Macrocerastes (including B. parviocula) in having a concavity on the lateral wall of the braincase for the origin of the M. retractor pterygoidei that is limited posteriorly by flange on the parietal, rather than extending onto the prootic (see Groombridge 1980; Fig. 3/4); in being mostly blackish dorsally with narrow pale (cream to yellowish) markings (Fig. 1); in lacking a regular, parallel-sided mid-dorsal stripe (and a series of dark, approximately semicircular markings immediately lateral to this stripe; Figs. 1, 2, 6); and in having a black middorsal marking on the head that extends anteriorly to between the nostrils (Figs. 1, 2). Among species of the subgenus Macrocerastes, the new species differs also from B. rhinoceros and B. gabonica in having a mostly dark rather than pale dorsal surface of the head. Unlike B. nasicornis, the new species lacks posteriorly notched scales. Unlike B. parviocula, the new species has facets on the frontals for articulation with the prefrontals that do not meet medially (Fig. 3), and it also lacks a subhorizontal ridge on the lateral surface of the prootic overhanging the foramen for the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve (Fig. 4). See Remarks section for additional possible differences between the new species and its most similar congener, B. parviocula.
Bothrops sazimai	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops sazimai is distinguished from other species of B. jararaca group by the following combination of characters: (1) larger eyes; (2) shorter and higher head; (3) slender body; (4) relative longer tail; (5) dorsum predominantly grayish and/or brownish; (6) venter creamish white, speckled in gray; (7) postorbital stripes with the same color of lateral saddles; (8) usually two postoculars; (9) 22–25 interictals; (10) 20–24 anterior dorsals; (11) 20–23 midbody dorsals; (12) 198–214 ventrals in females, 193–206 in males; (13) 54–65 subcaudals in females, 62–70 in males.Bothrops sazimai differs from the mainland populations of B. jararaca by its smaller adult size (SVL), relative longer tail (RTL), slender body, and larger eyes (Fig. 1; Table 1). The new species can be easily distinguished from the other three species of the B. jararaca group (B. alcatraz, B. insularis, and B. otavioi) by a higher number of ventrals and subcaudals (Table 1). B. sazimai differs from B. insularis by its grayish or brownish ground color pattern, smaller length of adults, relative smaller head, and relative smaller tail. The new species is also distinguished from B. alcatraz and B. otavioi, by its larger adult size, presence of conspicuous yellowish tail tip in juveniles, and additionally from the latter species by the presence of two postoculars and higher number of intersupraocular scales (Table 1).
Bothriechis nubestris	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: (1) a medium-sized slender arboreal pitviper; (2) dorsum green with heavy black mottling; (3) iris blackish; (4) superciliary scales absent; (5) interrictals 22–29; (6) supraoculars thin, usually kidney-shaped; (7) intersupraoculars 6–10; (8) partial rows or two rows of irregular scales between suboculars and supralabials; (9) infralabials 9–12; (10) first dorsals usually 21 (75.9%); (11) second dorsals usually 21 (58.6%); (12) third dorsals usually 17 (85.7%); (13) ventrals 150–160; (14) subcaudals 52–64; (15) tail prehensile.Specimens of Bothriechis nubestris differ from B. schlegelii and B. supraciliaris by lacking superciliary scales (present in B. schlegelii and B. supraciliaris). Bothriechis nubestris differs from all other Bothriechis species except B. nigroviridis by having green dorsal coloration with heavy black mottling and a blackish iris. Bothriechis nubestris differs from B. nigroviridis (see Table 1 for summary) by the combination of having 150–160 ventral scales (136–149 in B. nigroviridis), thin, often kidney-shaped supraoculars with a wide intersupraocular space (B. nigroviridis usually have wider supraoculars, never kidney-shaped, with narrow intersupraocular space), and higher average counts of interrictals, dorsals, and subcaudal scales than B. nigroviridis.
Vipera walser	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Vipera walser sp. nov. is generally similar to the species of the subgenus Pelias and can be confused with V. berus, which co-occurs on the Alps in allopatry (Fig. 6, Table 2). The species differs in a generalized higher count of cephalic scales, in particular the ones listed below (V. berus in parentheses): higher number of crown scales: 7–30, mean 17.4 (versus 4–22, mean 13.0); loreals: 4–15, mean 9.36 (versus 2–12, mean 6.72); and, to a lesser extent, perioculars: 16–23, mean 19.8 (versus 13–23, mean 18.4) (see Table 2). V. walser, in contrast to V. berus, also shows a marked tendency towards fragmentation of the cephalic large shields: the parietal scales are often completely broken down into several smaller scales: 2–14, mean 6.3 (versus 2–10, mean 2.4; see also Fig. 7). Less commonly, also the frontal scale is fragmented into smaller scales. Some individuals exhibit a dorsum of the head covered in small, irregular scales, like in V. aspis. V. walser has between 1.5 and 2 rows of subocular scales on both sides of the head in 85% of the analysed specimens (V. berus has typically one row of suboculars, with the exception of some populations in the southern Alps). The dorsal zigzag is often broken down into separate bars as in Vipera aspis (Linnaeus, 1758) or Vipera berus bosniensis (see Fig. 6). Despite the lack of a strictly diagnostic morphological character, V. walser can be readily distinguished from populations of V. berus from Central and northern Europe by a combination of several characters (e.g. the number of subocular scales, fragmentation of parietals and number of apicals). Identification based solely on observation of external morphology is less obvious if individuals of V. berus from southern Alps are considered. Despite this, discriminant analysis correctly identified individuals to species in 94% of females and 88% of males, based on a set of analysed characters (see Figs 2 and 3). The mean p-distance, based on a combined dataset of about 3000 base pairs of mitochondrial genes, between V. berus and V. walser is 5.36%. Based on our current knowledge of its distribution, Vipera walser is restricted to the Alps north of town of Biella, a subrange of the Pennine Alps, west of the river Ticino, north-western Italy (Fig. 8).The differences in cephalic scale count between Vipera walser and V. berus are shown in Table 2: Crown scales (females: t45,49 = 4.81, p < 0.0001; males: t28,71 = 5.20, p < 0.0001); loreals (females: t94,59 = -7.52, p < 0.0001; males: t62,67 = -4.43, p < 0.0001); and, in females only, perioculars (female: t64,16 = 5.33, p < 0.0001; males: t17,25 = -0.16, p = 0.87) and apicals (females: t32,86 = 2.14, p = 0.04; males: t18,08 = -0.12, p = 0.91); the number of scales between the eyes and the supralabials are higher (females: t66,40 = 5.85, p < 0.0001; males: t37,93 = 7.90, p < 0.0001).
Sistrurus tergeminus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DEFINITION. Scale rows at midbody usually number 25, ventral 138-160, caudals in males 27-34, females 21-28. Blotches in median series number 33-49; belly white or cream with dark lateral blotches. Total length of average adults is 46-66 cm. (Minton 1983)DEFINITION (edwardsii). Usually 23 scale rows at midbody, ventrals 137-152, caudals in males 28-36, females 24-29. Blotches in median series number 27-41; belly white or cream, unmarked or with sparse dark flecks. Total length rarely exceeds 55 cm. (Minton 1983)
Vipera graeca	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: This taxon differs from all other members of V. ursinii–renardi complex by having the following combination of morphological characters (Nilson & Andrén 1988; Nilson & Andrén 2001; Mizsei et al. 2016): small body size (for males a snout to vent length (SVL) max. 40.6 cm, and tail length is 5.4 cm, and for females a SVL max. 44.3 cm, and tail length is 4.1 cm); non-bilineate body ground colour pattern; white or bright brownish-grey ventral colour; no dark spots on labial, lateral and dorsal sides of head except occipital and postorbital stripes; dorsal zigzag pattern tagged with pointed corners at windings, or consisting of a narrow vertebral line only; 45–58 dorsal windings; nasal divided into two plates or united with nasorostralia; rostral as high as broad; 2–8 loreals; 13–20 circumoculars; upper preocular not separated from nasal; 7–20 crown scales; more fragmented parietals; 12–15 supralabials (sum of right and left sides); first three supralabials two times larger than the following ones; third supralabial below orbit; 14–19 sublabials (sum of right and left sides); 3–5 mental scales; early dorsal scale row reduction; 120–129 ventrals for males, 119–133 ventrals for females; lowest number of subcaudals in the complex: 21–29 subcaudals for males, 13–26 subcaudals for females (Mizsei et al. 2017: 84)
Gloydius rubromaculatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The above mentioned specimens were identified as the members of Gloydius judging on their small body size, bilateral pits and divided subcaudal scales (Hoge and Romano-Hoge, 1981), while differ from other congeneric species in the following characteristics: 1. two rows of cardinal crossbands on the back, regularly spaced along the body; 2. glossy dorsal scales, compared to matte scales in other members of Gloydius; 3. colubrid-liked dome shaped head in lateral view and oval shaped in dorsal view, compared to flat-shaped head in lateral view and triangular in dorsal view in other Gloydius; 4. irregular small black spots dispersed on the head scales; 5. inconspicuous canthus rostralis; 6. dark brown eyes with black pupils (figs 1 and 2).The new species is distinct from species in the Gloydius blomhoffii complex by having three palatine teeth (versus four palatine teeth); from the species in the Gloydius halysintermedius complex by having 21 rows of midbody dorsal scales (versus 23-rows). Thus, the new species is suggested to belong to the Gloydius strauchi complex.Within the Gloydius strauchi complex, G. rubromaculatus sp. n. is distinct from G. monticola by its 21-rows mid-body scales (versus 19-rows mid-body scales and 6 supralabials); from G. himalayanus by its indistinct canthus rostralis (versus very distinct canthus rostralis); from G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis by its oval head (versus triangular head), regular crossbands (versus irregular crossbands) and the lack of the white line on each side of body (versus obvious white line); from G. strauchi by its brownish black eyes (versus light brown eyes), and two rows of regular round crossbands (versus four irregular longitudinal strips).
Agkistrodon laticinctus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Combining characteristics for the subspecies A. c. laticinctus and A. c. pictigaster, we provide a diagnosis for A. laticinctus. The broad-banded cop- perhead (A. laticinctus) is a medium-sized pit viper with an average adult size of 56–76 cm and a maximum size of 95 cm (Gloyd & Conant, 1990; Conant & Collins, 1991), with a ratio of tail to total length of 0.11–0.18 in males and 0.11–0.16 in females. There is a single anal plate, keeled dorsal scales, and typically 23 midbody scale rows (range 21–25; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Subcaudals range from 38 to 62 in males and from 39 to 57 in females, whereas ventral scales number 138–155 with no variation between sexes (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Supralabials and infralabials range from 7 to 10 (mode 8) and 8 to 12 (mode 10), respectively, and total postoculars + suboculars range from 2 to 6 (mode 4; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). A combination of geography and colour pattern distinguishes the broad- banded copperhead from related species. There are 10– 18 brown to red cross-bands in males (10–21 in A. contortrix) and 10–18 in females (11–20 in A. contortrix) on a light to medium- to light-brown back- ground. Cross-bands do not narrow at midbody (Gloyd & Conant, 1990), whereas they generally narrow at the midbody in A. contortrix. Head coloration typically matches that of the cross-bands with a lighter cheek stripe (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). The approximate distribution of the A. laticinctus includes western and central Texas, central Oklahoma, and eastern Kansas, whereas the range of A. contortrix extends from Connecticut to Florida along the Atlantic coast, west to include eastern Texas north through eastern Oklaho- ma into eastern Kansas (Fig. 5A). Hybridization between the broad-banded copperhead and the eastern copperhead occurs along an ecological transition zone from south eastern Texas north to eastern Kansas, defined by an increasing elevation, decreasing precipitation, and transition from mixed forest and cypress swamp to prairie grassland. Diagnosis may be difficult for some individuals in this area without additional morphological data (Fig. 5A) [BURBRINK & GUIHER 2015].
Agkistrodon conanti	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (conanti): The Florida Cottonmouth (A. conanti) is diagnosed from the subspecies A. p. conanti. This species is a medium- to large-bodied semi-aquatic pit viper with an average adult size 76–122 cm and a maximum size of 189.2 cm (Gloyd & Conant, 1990; Conant & Collins, 1991), with a ratio of tail to total length of 0.15–0.19 in males and 0.13–0.18 in females. There is a single anal plate, keeled dorsal scales and typically 25 midbody scale rows (range 23–27; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Subcaudals range from 45 to 54 in males and from 41 to 49 in females, whereas ventral scales number 135–145 in males and 132–144 in females (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Supralabials and infralabials range from 6 to 10 (mode 8) and 9 to 12 (mode 10), respectively, and total postoculars + suboculars range from 2 to 4 (mode 3; Gloyd & Conant, 1990). A combination of ge- ography and colour pattern distinguishes the Florida cottonmouth from related species. There are 11–16 dark cross-bands on an olive, brown or black background, which may become subdued in adults, whereas A. piscivorus generally has 10–17 cross-bands that often become indistinguishable from the ground colour in adults (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). The head is typically brown with vertical stripes along the snout on the rostrals, prenasals, and first supralabials (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). Dark stripes appear on the lower jaw extending from the mental to the first four or five infralabials (Gloyd & Conant, 1990). A dark cheek stripe is present bordered above and below by pale stripes and often present in adults, although it is often in- distinguishable from the ground colour in adult A. piscivorus (Gloyd & Conant, 1990; Conant & Collins, 1991). The distribution of the Florida Cottonmouth extends from southern Florida to approximately Savannah, Georgia, and west to south-eastern Alabama (Fig. 5B), whereas the Northern Cottonmouth ranges in the USA from south-eastern Virginia to central Georgia, east of the Appalachian Mountains, north to southern Illinois and eastern Kansas. Hybridization between the Florida and Northern cottonmouth occurs in the mid-Atlantic coastal plains in southern North Carolina to the southern coastal plains in south- eastern Louisiana and diagnosis may be difficult without additional morphological and molecular data for some individuals in this area (Burbrink & Guiher 2015: 522).
Crotalus polisi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The presence of nasorostral scales distinguishes the new species from all congeners except for species of the C. mitchellii complex. From C. mitchellii the new species differs in typically having more tail bands (range of mode or median between males and females of each species is presented for all comparisons: 5–6 vs 3–4), more dorsal body blotches (40–42.5 vs 32–34), fewer dorsal scale rows (23 vs 25), shorter ultimate supralabial scale (slightly longer than high vs twice as long as high), fewer supralabials (14 vs 16), fewer ventral scales in females (169 vs 180), fewer temporal scale rows (7 vs 8), colour pattern (mostly uniform colour pattern of slate or charcoal grey with indistinct blotches vs variable colour pattern), and smaller adult body size. From mainland popula- tions of C. pyrrhus the new species differs in having typically more dorsal body blotches (40–42.5 vs 33–34), fewer dorsal scale rows (23 vs 25), fewer ventrals (168–169 vs 176), fewer temporal scale rows (7 vs 8), fewer supralabials (14 vs 16), colour pattern (mostly uniform colour pattern of slate or charcoal grey with indistinct blotches vs extremely variable), and smaller adult body size. From C. angelensis the new species differs in having typically fewer dorsal scale rows (23 vs 27), more supralabials (14 vs 13), fewer ventrals (168–169 vs 182–188), colour pattern (colour pattern of slate or charcoal grey with indistinct blotches vs buff or pink ground colour with grey to russet hexagonal blotches), and smaller adult body size. From C. thalassoporus, the new species differs in having more tail bands (5–6 vs 3–4), more dorsal body blotches (40–42.5 vs 31–32), more interrictals (25–26 vs 22–23), more prefrontals (21–27.5 vs 18–20), and colour pattern (colour pattern of slate or charcoal grey with indistinct blotches vs fawn, pinkish or beige ground colour with indistinct rust-brown blotches).
Crotalus thalassoporus	Serpentes	Viperidae	DiagnosisThe presence of nasorostral scales distinguishes the new species from all congeners except for species of the C. mitchellii complex. From C. mitchellii the new species differs in having typically fewer dorsal scale rows (21.5–22 vs 25), fewer subcaudals (16–22 vs 20–24), fewer temporal scale rows (7 vs 8), fewer supralabials (14 vs 16), fewer interrictals (22–23 vs 28), fewer prefrontals (18–20 vs 30–31), colour pattern (pale tan, pinkish, or beige ground colour with indistinct rust-brown blotches vs variable colour pattern), and smaller adult body size. From mainland populations of C. pyrrhus the new species differs in having typically fewer tail bands (3–4 vs 4–6), fewer dorsal scale rows (21.5–22 vs 25), fewer temporal scale rows (7 vs 8), fewer supralabials (14 vs 16), fewer interrictals (22–23 vs 29), fewer prefrontals (18–20 vs 27–34), colour pattern (pale tan, pinkish, or beige ground colour with indistinct rust-brown blotches vs extremely variable), and smaller adult body size. From C. angelensis, the new species differs in having typically fewer tail bands (3–4 vs 5–8), fewer dorsal body blotches (31–32 vs 40–41), fewer dorsal scale rows (21.5–22 vs 27), fewer subcaudals (16–22 vs 20–25), fewer ventrals (169.5–174 vs 182–188), more supralabials (14 vs 13), fewer interrictals (22–23 vs 29–30), fewer pre- frontals (18–20 vs 25–26), and smaller adult body size. From C. polisi, the new species differs in having typically fewer tail bands (3–4 vs 5–6), fewer dorsal body blotches (31– 32 vs 40–42.5), fewer subcaudals in females (16 vs 17), more ventrals in females (174 vs 169), fewer interrictals in males (22 vs 26), fewer prefrontals (18–20 vs 21–27.5), and colour pattern (pale tan, pinkish or beige ground colour with indistinct rust-brown blotches vs slate or charcoal grey ground colour with indistinct blotches).
Gloydius angusticeps	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The above mentioned specimens were identified as the members of the genus Gloydius based on their small body size, bilateral pits and divided subcaudal scales (Hoge and Romano-Hoge, 1981). The new species differs from other congeneric species in the following characteristics: (i) long and narrow head; (ii) 2 – 4 rows of discrete blackish brown spots on the back; (iii) a pair of round spots on the parietal scales (one on each side); (iv) a pair of arched stripes on the occiput; (v) small vaporous black spots on the ventral scales; (vi) up to 21 rows (occasionally 19 or 20 rows) of mid-body dorsal scales.Gloydius angusticeps sp. nov. is distinct from species in the Gloydius blomhoffii complex by having three palatine teeth (versus four palatine teeth), and from the Gloydius halys-intermedius complex by having up to 21 rows of mid-body dorsal scale rows (versus generally 23 rows).Comparison within the Gloydius strauchi complex. Gloydius angusticeps sp. nov. is distinct from G. strauchi by having 2 – 4 rows of small discrete spots on the back (versus four zigzag longitudinal strips) and slender head shape; differs from G. monticola by having 7 supralabials (versus always 6 supralabials) and >30 pairs of subcaudal scales (versus always less than 30 pairs); differs from G. rubromaculatus by having dark brown spots or ×-shaped patterns on the dorsum (versus large red crossbands), matt dorsal scales (versus glossy dorsal scales) and slender triangular head (versus oval head); differs from G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis by its grayish brown body coloration (versus yellowish brown) and lacking of a lateral white line (versus obvious white line); differs from G. himalayanus by possessing an indistinct canthus rostralis (versus very distinct canthus rostralis, Gloyd and Conant, 1990).
Echis romani	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A large species (up to 715 mm in total length) genetically distinct from other species of the E. ocellatus complex and characterized by the combination of following characters: (1) a large number of ventral scales (148 – 151.9 – 156 in males and 152 – 159.9 – 168 in females), (2) simple subcaudal scales at the number from 25 to 29 in males (average 27.1) and from 18 to 23 in females (average 20.9), (3) 29 to 31 dorsal rows keeled in the middle of the body in males (average 30.7) and 31 to 33 in females (mean 31.3), (4) a large number of small scales surrounding each eye (mean 16.2), (5) dorsal coloration pattern with brown vertebral stripe dark regularly interspersed with light spots, on the sides dark spots with white ocelli most often located next to the medio-dorsal light spots and the presence three to six dark spots on each ventral scale. (Trape 2018)
Macrovipera razii	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The newly described species differs from M. schweizeri by its higher number of mid-dorsal scales (25 vs. 23), which however overlaps the counts in other M. lebetina subspecies. Macrovipera razii sp. n. differs from M. lebetina by possessing a higher count of ventrals (172–175 vs. 160–170), and by having elongated anterior chin-shields, which are more than three times longer than the posterior ones. In contrast, M. lebetina has square anterior chin-shields, which are less than twice as long as the posterior chin-shields (Fig. 6). Compared to M. lebetina, the new species has a lower number of canthal + intersupraocular scales. More comparisons are provided in Table 4. Interestingly, Macrovipera razii sp. n. and M. lebetina cernovi are similar in both possessing one large supraocular scale, which is absent in M. lebetina obtusa (Fig. 5). Outside Iran, the subspecies M. lebetina euphratica (Schmidt, 1939) differs by having supraoculars that are split up into five scales, making it clearly distinguishable from Macrovipera razii sp. n., which has one large supraocular scale. The latter can be distinguished from Macrovipera lebetina lebetina (Linnaeus, 1758) and Macrovipera lebetina transmediterranea (Nilson & Andrén 1988) by the higher number of ventrals (172– 175 vs. 146–163 and 150–164, respectively), from Macrovipera lebetina turanica (Chernov, 1940) by the latter’s semidivided supraoculars and a dorsal colour pattern that consists of a dark ground colour with a lighter, orange zigzag pattern. (Oraie et al. 2018)Description of holotype (Figs 5–7): A viper with a robust and massive body. Snout–vent length (SVL) 1110 mm, and tail length (TaL) 160 mm. Length of head from tip of rostral to end of lower jaw 46.92 mm, and width of head at widest point 34.76 mm. The head is broad and triangular with a bluntly rounded snout, well distinct from neck, covered with small, imbricate and strongly keeled scales. Dorsal side of head with 55 small, imbricate and strongly keeled scales (canthal + intersupraocular scales), and 10 small scales between supraoculars (intrasupraoculars). Eye bordered by a complete circumocular ring of 15 scales including one large supraocular. This circle is bordered by 21–22 scales in an outer ring. Loreals 15, of which 5 are in contact with the nasal scale. One nasorostral scale, partly fused with nasal. Two canthal scales (supranasals) above nasal, one apical scale above rostral. Twelve supralabials on each side (4th largerst, its length greater than width), and 13 infralabials more or less equal in size. Anterior chin-shields more than three times longer than the posterior ones, 3–4 infralabials in contact with anteriormost chin-shield. 175 ventral scales, which are followed by 47 divided subcaudal scales. Anal scute entire. 24 rows of dorsal scales, strongly keeled, around anterior dorsum (one head length behind head), 25 rows at mid-body, and 17 rows around posterior body (one head length before anal scute). Dorsum shiny black throughout, belly dark, anterior part of ventral face with irregular light blotches. (Oraie et al. 2018)Paratype (Fig. 8): Body shape and coloration are very similar to that of the holotype. One large supraocular scale; 2/2 canthal scales; 10 interocular scales in a line between the eyes; 1 apical scale; 15 inner circumocular scales on each side, including suparaocular; 19/19 outer circumoculars on each side; 10/11 (l/r) supralabials; 12/13 (l/r) infralabials; dorsal scale rows 24/25/19; 172 ventrals: anal scute entire; 47 pairs of subcaudals. Snout–vent length 1110 mm, tail 180 mm. Length of head 50.84 mm and width of head at widest point 34.73 mm. (Oraie et al. 2018)Chromatic variation: There is considerable geographic variation in the colour pattern of Macrovipera razii sp. n. Despite their very close genetic relationship (Fig. 2) and weak within-group genetic divergence (0.7%), individuals from Fars Province, southern Iran, (ERP 1981, ERP 1518, ERP 1531) differ significantly in their colour pattern from the holotype and paratype (Fig. 9). Rather than having an entirely black colour, their dorsum is brownish grey with narrow crossbars, and the ventral side is a little lighter than the dorsum with small black dots. Geographic variation in colour pattern could be strongly related to landscape features and altitude, as is suggested by the holotype and paratype with their black colour occurring in high-altitude habitats with black rocks. (Oraie et al. 2018)
Vipera sakoi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Small-sized snake, males have mini- mal value of midbody scales (19), loreals, apicals and crown shields, a relatively large number of preven- trals, and maximum number of supralabials; females have maximum number of ventrals and supralabials, minimal value of sublabials, loreals and number of shields around an eye, a relatively small number of zigzag wings. Vipers of both sexes from Erzincan differ from all other vipers under comparison by minimum number of loreals and maximal number of supralabials. From above, males are painted in grey, females, in light brown tones (Fig. 4); zigzag consists of not numerous transversely elongated stains, united only in some places in males, the zigzag is well devel- oped in females. The belly is light-grey in females and dark-spotted grey in males. Both sexes have a white throat (Fig. 5).
Bothrops sonene	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops sonene can be distinguished from its congeners by the exclusive combination of the following morphological characters: dorsal color pattern of body consisting of small C-shaped blotches, apparently unique for the genus; postocular stripe originating posteriorly to the eye, two or two and a half scales width, covering three or four posterior supralabials; dorsum of the head with paired markings arranged symmetrically; venter cream heavily speckled with brown; lacunolabial scale absent, prelacunal discrete contacting second supralabial; prefoveals three to five; subfoveal single and usually present; postfoveals absent to two; canthals two; intersupraoculars seven; suboculars one or two; postoculars two or three; supralabials seven or eight; infralabials nine to eleven; interrictals 26–27; middorsal scales 23–25; ventrals 172 in the female, 169–173 in males; subcaudals divided, 45 in the female, 50 in males.Comparisons. Bothrops sonene is easily distinguished from its congeners by its unique dorsal color pattern of relatively small and C-shaped blotches. It is distinguished from B. atrox, B. barnetti, B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. pictus and B. taeniatus by the absence of a lacunolabial scale (= prelacunal fused with second supralabial), a condition shared with the species of the B. alternatus and B. neuwiedi groups. Similar C-shaped (or in the shape of a headphone) dorsal blotches are present in B. alternatus, B. cotiara, B. fonsecai, B. itapetiningae and B. jonathani (B. alternatus group excluding B. ammodytoides, whose dorsal blotches are quadrangular); however, the blotches of B. sonene are smaller and rounder than those species, the lower set of blotches are well separated from each other (except in B. itapetiningae), and blotches are bordered with black (vs. bordered with white). The new species can also be distinguished from some species of the B. alternatus group by the postocular stripe starting posteriorly to the eye (vs. below the eye in B. alternatus, B. jonathani and B. ammodytoides), number of prefoveals (3–5 vs. 3– 15), subfoveals (0–1 vs. 1–6), supralabials (8 vs. 8–12) and infralabials (9–11 vs. 10–15), length of hemipenes (relatively short vs. long), and fusiform and divergent hemipenial lobes (vs. parallel and subcylindrical lobes). Bothrops sonene is more similar to the B. neuwiedi group of species than to the rest of the species of the genus. They all have a symmetrical pattern of blotches in the dorsum of the head, a brown and relatively wide postocular stripe that extends posterior to the rictal region, a discrete prelacunal scale contacting the second supralabial, and similar number of prefoveals, subfoveals, supralabials and infralabials. They also bear resemblance in hemipenial morphology; the overall morphology of the hemipenis of the new species is identical to that of the species of the B. neuwiedi group, which is characteristic of that group. Differences in coloration and scalation between Bothrops sonene and the species of the B. neuwiedi group are summarized in Table 2.
Gloydius caucasicus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (halys). Dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody (very seldom 21 or 25); ventrals 141 – 187, sub- caudals 29 – 56; 7 – 9 supralabials. Total length up to 750 mm [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (halys). A moderately stout viper up to 530 mm total length in males, to 590 mm in females according to Gloyd and Conant (1990), but up to 750 mm fide Orlov and Barabanov (1999). Snout seen in profile recurved; supralabial scales usually 7-9. Apical pits absent. Dorsal scales in 23 (very rarely in 21 or 25) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 164- 178 (147-187 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999); subcaudal scales paired, between 42-49 (29-56 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999). Body with 33- 47 dark transverse bands, each 3-5 scales wide and extending down to scale row 3 or 2; light areas between blotches relatively narrow. Light line above dark cheek stripe on 1-1.5 adjacent rows of scales [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (boehmei, sensu Nilson, 1983). Total length 438 mm and tail 49 mm. Snout slightly raised. Dorsal scales, except lowermost row, strongly keeled on body and tail. At midbody scale rows are 23, apical pits absent. Two pre- and two postoculars on each side. Supralabials 7, sublabials 11. Ventrals 155, subcaudals 35, anal not divided [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (boehmei). A small viper up to 487 mm total length. Apical pits absent. Two pre- and two postocular scales on each side. Seven supralabial scales and 11 sublabial scales. Dorsal scales in 23 rows around midbody; ventral scales 155; 35 subcaudal scales paired, cloacal plate not divided. Body with 41 dark transverse bands, each 3-4 scales wide and extending down to scale row 7 or 8 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (caraganus). A relatively slender and moderately stout viper up to 735 mm total length in males (740 mm and more according to Orlov and Barabanov, 1999), to 530 mm in females. Snout seen in profile slightly recurved, supralabial scales usually 8 (71%) sometimes 7. Apical pits absent. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 149-167 (141-183 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999); subcaudal scales paired, between 33-47 (16-51 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999). General coloration is pale. Body with 36-50 dark transverse bands, not extending low on the sides and with relatively broad light areas between them [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (caucasicus). Total length up to 660 mm. Supra- labials 7 – 8, rarely 9; dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody (rarely 25); ventrals 142 – 169; subcaudals 31 – 46 [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (caucasicus). A moderately stout viper up to 660 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8, rarely 9. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 25) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 142-169; subcaudal scales paired, between 31-46. Body with 33-42 dark transverse bands, each 4-6 scales wide and extending down to scale row 3 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (cognatus). Total length up to 590 mm. Supralabials 7 – 8; dorsal scale in 23 rows at midbody, sometimes 21; ventrals 153 – 165; subcaudals 36 – 54 [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (cognatus). A small viper of the genus, up to 590 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows around mid-body; ventral scales between 153-165; subcaudal scales paired, between 36-54. Body with 29- 43 dark transverse bands, each 4-5 scales wide and extending down to scale row 4 to 2 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (stejnegeri). Supralabials 7 – 8; dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody; ventrals 147 – 165; subcaudals 39 – 46. Total length up to 625 mm [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (stejnegeri). A small viper of the genus, up to 625 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23 rows around midbody; ven- tral scales between 147-165; subcaudal scales paired, between 39-46. Body with 28-38 dark transverse bands, each 3-6 scales wide and ex- tending down to scale row 3 or 2 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis (ubsunurensis). Halys pit viper of “Gloydius halys” complex is diagnosed by the combination of the fol- lowing features: (1) a large number of ventral scales (V+PreV) from 171 to 188; (2) a large number of sub- caudal scales: 47–53 in males and 42–46 in females; (3) a large number of light bands around the body: 35–41; (4) a large number of light bands around the body and the tail: 47–63; (5) a light background “desert” coloration of the body dorsal surface. For detailed comparisons see KROPACHEV & ORLOV 2017: 141.
Gloydius caraganus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (caraganus). A relatively slender and moderately stout viper up to 735 mm total length in males (740 mm and more according to Orlov and Barabanov, 1999), to 530 mm in females. Snout seen in profile slightly recurved, supralabial scales usually 8 (71%) sometimes 7. Apical pits absent. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows around midbody; ventral scales between 149-167 (141-183 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999); subcaudal scales paired, between 33-47 (16-51 fide Orlov and Barabanov, 1999). General coloration is pale. Body with 36-50 dark transverse bands, not extending low on the sides and with relatively broad light areas between them [WAGNER et al. 2015].
Gloydius cognatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis. A small viper of the genus, up to 590 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23 (rarely 21) rows around mid-body; ventral scales between 153-165; subcaudal scales paired, between 36-54. Body with 29- 43 dark transverse bands, each 4-5 scales wide and extending down to scale row 4 to 2 [WAGNER et al. 2015].Diagnosis. Total length up to 590 mm. Supralabials 7 – 8; dorsal scale in 23 rows at midbody, sometimes 21; ventrals 153 – 165; subcaudals 36 – 54 [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].
Gloydius stejnegeri	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (stejnegeri). Supralabials 7 – 8; dorsal scales in 23 rows at midbody; ventrals 147 – 165; subcaudals 39 – 46. Total length up to 625 mm [ORLOV & BARABANOV 1999].Diagnosis (stejnegeri). A small viper of the genus, up to 625 mm total length. Supralabial scales 7-8. Dorsal scales in 23 rows around midbody; ven- tral scales between 147-165; subcaudal scales paired, between 39-46. Body with 28-38 dark transverse bands, each 3-6 scales wide and ex- tending down to scale row 3 or 2 [WAGNER et al. 2015].
Trimeresurus arunachalensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Trimeresurus arunachalensis sp. nov. differs from all mainland Asian pitvipers of northeastern India and adjacent China except T. medoensis (i.e., from Ovophis monticola, Protobothrops himalayanus, P. jerdonii, P. kaulbacki, P. mucrosquamatus, Trimeresurus albolabris, T. erythrurus, T. gumprechti, T. popeiorum, T. stejnegeri, T. tibetanus, and T. vogeli) in having 17 dorsal scale rows at midbody.Trimeresurus arunachalensis sp. nov. can be distinguished from T. medoensis by its distinctive hemipenis — unforked, slender, attenuate and with no spines visible to the naked eye (vs forked, spinose hemipenis with large spines); by its scales being acutely keeled (vs obtuse keels which are like ‘loose folds of skin’ — David et al., 2001); by its overall coloration being reddish-brown (vs. green); by having a white lateral stripe on the outer posterior edges of ventrals or sometimes the first dorsal scale row (vs. lateral stripe — red below, white above on first dorsal scale row); and by a reddish-brown eye (vs. green). Trimeresurus arunachalensis, though phylogenetically very close to T. tibetanus, differs from it morphologically in having midbody scales in 17 longitudinal rows (vs. 21, 19, or 20) and an unforked hemipenis with no spines visible to the naked eye (vs. forked, with large spines).
Bothrops monsignifer	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops monsignifer may be distinguished from its congeners by the unique combination of the following morphological features: canthorostrals, a feature absent in the rest of Bothrops, present in some specimens; prelacunal fused or partially fused with 2nd supralabial; internasals 1/1, sometimes separated by one scale; rostral trapezoidal; canthals 1/1, oval to rounded, with similar size or slightly larger than internasals; medial intercanthals 3–4; intersupraoculars 8–12; intercanthals and intersupraoculars keeled and frequently slightly keeled; supraoculars oval; suboculars 1–3; postoculars 2–3; loreal subtriangular; prefoveals 2–6; subfoveals absent; postfoveals 0–2; scales between suboculars and 4th supralabial 1–2; supralabials 7–8; infralabials 9–11; middorsal scales 23–25; ventrals in females 189–195, in males 182–190; subcaudals in females 48–58, in males 54–63; subcaudals divided, exceptionally some of them entire; dorsal blotches triangular or subtriangular dark brown, usually fused on the vertebral line; additional markings between the blotches absent or faint in females, present and conspicuous in males; conspicuous and dark postocular stripe, 2.5–3.0 scales width, starting posteriorly to the eye, encroaching 2–3 supralabials and one infralabial, not bordered dorsally by a pale band (a feature displayed by many bothropoid species).Comparisons (conditions for other species in parentheses) (Fig. 9). Bothrops monsignifer is easily distinguished from the species of Bothrocophias by the pattern of subtriangular and conspicuous dorsolateral blotches along the body (vs. crossbands irregularly outlined), the absence of upturned snout (vs. presence) and the absence of tuberculate keels in body scales (vs. presence). However, Bothrops monsignifer is similar to Bothrocophias microphthalmus and B. hyoprora by the presence of canthorostrals, tiny scales located between the rostral, nasal, internasal and/or canthal (Fig. 8D). Although not present in all the specimens of Bothrops monsignifer, these unusual scales distinguish the new species from its congeners, as they were not observed in any other species of Bothrops.Bothrops monsignifer is easily distinguished from the species of the “B. alternatus” and “B. neuwiedi” groups by the condition of the prelacunal scale fused with 2nd supralabial (Figs. 8B–D) (vs. not fused), and the absence of subfoveals (vs. presence). They are also distinguished by the pattern of subtriangular and conspicuous dorsolateral blotches on the body (vs. C-shaped or rectangular in “Bothrops alternatus” and trapezoidal in “B. neuwiedi”). Some immature males of Bothrops monsignifer may be confused with B. mattogrossensis (geographically close member of “B. neuwiedi”), because of their dark spots between dorsolateral blotches and labial scales (which tend to fade in adult males), features present in B. mattogrossensis.The new species is distinguished from species of the “Bothrops atrox” and “B. jararaca” groups by the oval to rounded canthals (Figs. 8E–F) (vs. elongated). It can be distinguished from Bothrops atrox (a geographically close member of the “B. atrox” group) by its pattern of subtriangular and conspicuous dorsolateral blotches (vs. trapezoidal with diffuse and pale edges), the presence of white bands over a dark ground color on the tail (vs. absence) and the ventral speckling (vs. ventral checkerboard pattern). Bothrops monsignifer can be easily distinguished from the species of the “B. taeniatus” group by the pattern of dorsolateral subtriangular body blotches (vs. banded) and the absence of black-greenish or brown-greenish coloration (vs. presence).Bothrops monsignifer is similar to species of the “B. atrox”, “B. jararaca”, “B. jararacussu”, and “B. taeniatus” groups in the presence of a lacunolabial (i.e. prelacunal fused with 2nd supralabial) and the absence of subfoveals. They also share the general shape of supralabials, which are bigger in size than those of species of the “Bothrops alternatus” and “B. neuwiedi” groups. The new species is most similar to Bothrops sanctaecrucis and B. brazili, geographically close species of the “B. jararacussu” group. They resemble each other in having oval to rounded internasals and canthals, and dark, conspicuous, triangular or subtriangular dorsolateral blotches. The absence of additional markings between dorsolateral blotches has only been observed in Bothrops muriciencis (a member of “B. jararacussu”, endemic to northeastern Brazil). Bothrops monsignifer can be distinguished from B. brazili by numbers of ventrals, prefoveals, medial intercanthals and gulars (Table 2), larger dorsolateral blotches, and broad dark brown postocular stripe (vs. thin light brown or gray). It can be distinguished from Bothrops sanctaecrucis by numbers of ventrals, prefoveals, medial intercanthals, gulars and intersupraoculars (Table 2), and by the relative size of canthals (small vs. large). The new species may be confused with Bothrops sanctaecrucis given their similar pattern of body coloration, but they are easily distinguished by the condition of the postocular stripe, which is conspicuous and wide in B. monsignifer and faint or absent in B. sanctaecrucis. We refer to Table 2 for additional comparisons between Bothrops monsignifer and geographically close species of Bothrocophias and Bothrops.
Crotalus concolor	Serpentes	Viperidae	Description: Rather small in size, the length measuring 70 cm. Slender, the body, as usual, being thickest in the middle and tapering slightly in both directions; neck constricted; head broad and flat. The rattles small and delicate; six rattles present, of which the sixth is broken, these measuring 8.5 x 20 mm.Scale rows twenty-five over middle and caudal part of anterior region, reducing in number caudad; all keeled excepting those of the first row; heavy dorsally but weaker on the sides. Abdominal plates 175; the tail plates numbering 25-j-2, mostly in a single series. Top of head covered by small irregular scales except for the large supraoculars; anterior nasal large, in contact with the rostral which is higher than wide (6:5); upper labials 13, separated from eye by 3-4 rows of small scales; lower labials 15; first pair of genials very small, the second pair enlarged  (Woodbury 1929).Coloration: General appearance, a reddish-yellow brown. A faint or almost obsolete pattern of slightly darker brown rhombs of which there are about 40 along the dorsum difficult to trace but mostly connecting with spots of similar color on the sides, these spots reaching the first row of scales; this pattern giving way on the tail to faint cross-bands which are ten in number. Indications of an extremely faint postocular line passing horizontally to the posterior edge of the mouth. Abdominal plates more yellow but in most cases grading to a slightly darker yellowish brown peppered with spots of darker color at each end of the plate (Woodbury 1929).For a redescription of the Holotype see Halm et al. 2022.
Gloydius huangi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Gloydius huangi sp. nov. can be differentiated from all congeners by a combination of the following morphological characteristics: 1) moderate body size with SVL up to 532 mm; 2) head robust, round, oval in shape; 3) snout blunt, upper jaw not projecting forward; 4) mid-dorsal scale count 21; 5) ventral scale count 158–174; 6) subcaudal scale count 42 or 43; 7) internasal scales rectangular shaped, not truncated anteriorly; 8) dorsal body scales matte, not glassy, without metallic luster; 9) long spines present on hemipenes, extending beyond the fork point toward tips; 10) dorsal background coloration ranging from light buff (color 2) to pale pinkish buff (color 3); 11) distinct olive horn color (color 16) transverse patches with jet black (color 300) edges across dorsal body from neck to tail; 12) ventrolateral lines absent; and 13) a jet black (color 300) C-shaped pattern on occipital region of head, with the opening of the C figure facing anterior direction.Comparisons: Gloydius huangi sp. nov. is phenotypically most similar to topotypic G. strauchi, but can be distinguished by having a larger maximum body size (up to SVL 532 mm vs. <450 mm), a matte dorsal scale texture (vs. glossy with metallic luster), and a light buff (color 2) to pale pinkish buff (color 3) dorsal background coloration (vs. light neutral gray [color 297]).Compared with closely related congeners, G. huangi sp. nov. differs from G. monticola by having a more robust head with a blunt snout (vs. slender head with a pointy snout), a greater number of dorsal scale rows at midbody (21 vs. 19), a greater number of subcaudal scales (42 or 43 pairs vs. <34 pairs), a matte dorsal scale texture (vs. glossy with metallic luster), distinct, regular transverse patches on dorsal surface of the body (vs. irregular patterns or vertebral zig-zag stripes), and a light buff (color 2) to pale pinkish buff (color 3) background coloration (vs. olive sulphur yellow [color 90]); from G. rubromaculatus by having a blunt snout that does not project forward (vs. pointy and projecting forward), enlarged spines of the hemipenes extending beyond the fork point (vs. short spines, absent beyond the fork point), a jet black (color 300) C-shaped pattern on occipital region of head, with the opening of the C figure facing anterior direction (vs. a pair of C-shaped dark salmon color [color 252] patterns on dorsolateral head, with the opening of the C figures facing laterally toward each other), transverse patches along the dorsal body (vs. paired twin spots), and an olive horn color (color 16) dorsal ornamentation pattern (vs. dark salmon color [color 252]) (Figs. 4 and 5; Table 6).Additionally, the new species differs from G. angusticeps by having a more robust head and a blunt snout (vs. slender head and pointy snout), a matte scale texture (vs. glossy with weak metallic luster), and regular transverse patches on dorsal surface of the body (vs. two to four lateral rows of spots); from G. himalayanus by distinct coloration and ornmentation patterns of dorsal patches (jet black [color 300] outlines with olive horn color [color 16] vs. uniform dark neutral gray [color 299] or sepia [color 279]); from G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis by having a distinct dorsal background coloration (light buff [color 2] or pale pinkish buff [color 3] vs. true cinnamon [color 260] for G. qinlingensis, fawn color [color 258] for G. liupanensis) and by the absences of ventrolateral lines from neck to tail (vs. presence) and enlarged spines at the hemipene base (vs. presence). Finally, G. huangi sp. nov. differs from all remaining members of the G. halys-intermedius (G. cognatus, G. changdaoensis, G. halys, G. intermedius, G. rickmersi, G. shedaoensis, and G. stejnegeri) and G. blomhoffii (G. blomhoffii, G. brevicaudus, G. tsushimaensis, and G. ussuriensis) species complexes by having fewer dorsal scale rows at mid-body (21 vs. 23–25) and rectangular-shaped internasal scales (vs. comma-shaped) (Fig. 5) [from Wang et al. 2019].
Crotalus mictlantecuhtli	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A rattlesnake belonging to the Crotalus durissus species complex, characterized as other species by a prominent vertebral process and conspicuous scale tuberculations. Crotalus mictlantecuhtli is not sympatric with any congeners, but its range closely approaches those of C. simus-Isthmus-Chiapas and C. tzabcan. Crotalus mictlantecuhtli can be distinguished from all members of the Crotalus durissus species complex by exclusive combination of the following characters: paravertebral stripes with three scale rows, commonly paravertebral stripes with light center, presupraloreal scale absent, postloreal scale absent, usually postsupraloreal scale absent, contact between lacunal and supralabial scales in 68% (n=34) of specimens, postocular stripes of 3.0–3.5 scales width, with light center, contact between paravertebral stripes and supraocular scales in 97% (n=34) of specimens, and dark prefrontal bar interrupted.Comparisons. Crotalus mictlantecuhtli is closely related to species of the northern clade (C. culminatus) of the Crotalus durissus species complex, and differ from them by having 168–176 (mode=170) ventral scales in males, 169–178 (mode=174) females (vs. 170–182 [175] males, 178–185 [178] females in C. culminatus); mid-dorsal scale rows 27–29 (mode=27) (vs. 27–33 [29] in C. culminatus); width of paravertebral stripe of three scales, commonly with light center (vs. usually one in C. culminatus); intercanthal scales absent (vs. 60% present in C. culminatus); first infralabial scales not divided (vs. 56% divided in C. culminatus); postrostral scale absent (vs. 44% present in C. culminatus); prenasal-supralabial scales contact in 100% (vs. 80% present in C. culminatus); interpreocular scale absent (vs. 20% present in C. culminatus); usually two anterior intersupraocular scales (vs. usually three in C. culminatus); presupraloreal absent (vs. often absent in C. culminatus); postloreal absent (vs. often absent in C. culminatus); postsupraloreal scale usually absent (vs. usually two in C. culminatus); superciliar scale absent (vs. 20.8% present in C. culminatus); lacunal-supralabial scales contact in 68% (vs. 16.6% in C. culminatus); postocular stripe 3.0–3.5 scales width and light center (vs. three scales and faded coloration in C. culminatus); dorsal body blotches in males usually 24 (23–27) (vs. usually 26 [22–30] in C. culminatus); 23 (22–26) in females (vs. usually 27 [26–31] in C. culminatus); contact between paravertebral stripes and supraoculars in 97% (vs. 24% in C. culminatus); prefrontal bar interrupted in 100% (vs. 96% in C. culminatus). Crotalus mictlantecuhtli is distinguished from C. simus by the absence of intercanthal scales (vs. presence of 10%), absence of presupraloreal scale (vs. rarely present), absence of postloreal scale (vs. rarely present), postsupraloreal scale rarely present (vs. usally present), superciliar scale absent (vs. rarely present), contac between lacunal and supralabial scales of 68% (vs. not contact), postocular stripe of 3.0–3.5 scales with light center (vs. three scales and faded), tertiary blotches not conspicuous (vs. conspicuous), paravertebral stripes often with light center (vs. usually without light center), contact of paravertebral stripes with supraoculars of 97% (vs. contact of 80%), prefrontal bar interrupted in 100% (vs. interrupted in 90%).Color in life. Color in life varies with adult specimens presenting low contrast between blotches and interspaces, although some are more contrasting (Fig. 6 in CM et al. 2020).
Crotalus ehecatl	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A rattlesnake belonging to the Crotalus durissus species complex, characterized as other species by a prominent vertebral process and conspicuous scale tuberculations. The distribution range of C. ehecatl closely approaches to those of C. culminatus and C. simus, and to a lesser extent to C. mictlantecuhtli. Crotalus ehecatl can be distinguished from all members of the Crotalus durissus species complex by exclusive combination of the following characters: paravertebral stripes of two scale rows, usually paravertebral stripes with light center on the nape, length of paravertebral stripes of 22 scales, 31 dorsal body blotches, intercanthal scales in 18.7% (n=16) of specimens, interpreocular scale in 50% (n=16) of specimens, first infralabial scale divided in 18.7% (n=16), postrostral scale in 12.5% (n=16), usually 1 postsupraloreal scale, contact between lacunal and supralabial scales in 56.2% (n =16) of specimens, postocular stripe of three scales, usually with light center, contact between paravertebral stripes and supraocular scales in 68.7% (n=16) of specimens, and a dark prefrontal bar interrupted in 93.7% (n=16) of specimens.Comparisons. Crotalus ehecatl is most closely related to species of the northern clade (C. culminatus) of the Crotalus durissus species complex, and is distinguished from these species by having 168–186 (mode=181) ventral scales in males, 177–187 (mode=187) in females; number of subcaudal scales 27–32 (mode=31) in males, 21–26 (mode=24) in females (vs. 25–32 [28] males, 20–25 [22] females in C. culminatus, and 27–32 [28] males, 20–26 [23] females in C. mictlantecuhtli); mid-dorsal scale rows 27–31 (mode=27) (vs. 27–33 [29] in C. culminatus); width of paravertebral stripe of two scales, usually with light center in the nape (vs. three commonly with light center in C. mictlantecuhtli, and usually one in C. culminatus); intercanthal scales present in 18.7% (vs. absent in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 60% in C. culminatus); first infralabial scales divided in 18.7% (vs. no divided in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 56% in C. culminatus); postrostral scale present in 12.5% (vs. absent in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 44% in C. culminatus); prenasal-supralabial scales contact in 93.7% (vs. present in 100% in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 80% in C. culminatus); interpreocular scale present in 50% (vs. absent in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 20% in C. culminatus); usually three anterior intersupraocular scales (vs. usually two in C. mictlantecuhtli); presupraloreal sometimes present (vs. absent in C. mictlantecuhtli); one or two postloreal scales sometimes present (vs. absent in C. mictlantecuhtli); usually one postsupraloreal scale (vs. usually absent in C. mictlantecuhtli, and two in C. culminatus); superciliar scale absent (vs. present in 20.8% in C. culminatus); lacunal-supralabial scales contact in 56.2% (vs. 68% in C. mictlantecuhtli and 16.6% in C. culminatus); post-ocular stripe of three scales in width and usually with a light center (vs. 3.0–3.5 scales width and usually light center in C. mictlantecuhtli, and three scales width and faded coloration in C. culminatus); usually 31 (25–31) dorsal body blotches in males (vs. usually 24 [23–27] in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 26 [22–30] in C. culminatus); in females 30 (25–30) (vs. usually 23 [22–26] in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 27 [26–31] in C. culminatus); contact between paravertebral stripes and supraoculars in 68.7% (vs. 97% in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 24% in C. culminatus); and the prefrontal bar interrupted in 93.7% (vs. 100% in C. mictlantecuhtli, and 96% in C. culminatus). Crotalus ehecatl is distinguished from C. simus by higher number of ventral scales 168–186 (181) vs. 170–177 (170), less number of scales length of paravertebral stripe 9–33 (22) vs. 20–39 (27), intercanthal scales present in 18.7% (vs. presence of 10%), first infralabial scale divided in 18.7% (vs. not divided), postrostral scale present in 12.5% (vs. absent), contact between prenasal and first supralabial scale of 93.7% (vs. contact of 100%), interpreocular scale present in 50% (vs. absent), usually three (2–5) anterior intersupraoculars (vs. usally two [2–4]), superciliar scale absent (vs. rarely present), contac between lacunal and supralabial sales of 56.2% (vs. not contact), postocular stripe of three scales with light center (vs. three scales and faded), tertiary blotches not conspicuous (vs. conspicuous), paravertebral stripes often with light center only in the nape (vs. without light center), contact of paravertebral stripes with supraoculars of 68.7% (vs. contact of 80%), prefrontal bar interrupted in 93.7% (vs. interrupted in 90%).
Atheris mongoensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Atheris mongoensis sp. nov. se distingue de toutes les autres espèces du genre Atheris par la combinaison de caractères suivante : (1) la présence sur le dessus de la tête et notamment au-dessus des yeux et dans la région temporale d’écailles allongées, lancéolées et dressées, avec à leur extrémité un petit tubercule (“knob” sensu Broadley 1998), contrastant avec la présence habituelle au centre de la région interorbitale de quelques écailles aplaties, élargies et à peine carénées; (2) le changement d’aspect des écailles sous-caudales le long de la queue, où elles sont successivement d’abord entières, puis divisées et finalement très étroites et lancéolées; (3) la présence de 19 à 21 rangs d’écailles dorsales à mi-corps, de 141 à 152 ventrales et de 43 à 55 sous-caudales; (4) l’existence habituelle de trois suprarostrales, de deux écailles entre la nasale et l’œil, et de deux rangées d’écailles entre l’œil et les supralabiales chez les femelles tandis que la deuxième rangée est absente chez les mâles.Comparaison avec d’autres espèces: En Afrique occidentale et centrale, sur les neuf espèces d’Atheris connues, deux présentent des écailles dressées dans la région céphalique : A. hirsuta et A. hispida. Toutes les deux diffèrent d’A. mongoensis sp. nov. par plusieurs caractères, dont notamment pour A. hirsuta par des yeux beaucoup plus grands (leur diamètre est environ trois fois supérieur à la distance à la lèvre au lieu de 0,9 à 1,4 fois chez A. mongoenis sp. nov.), un plus grand nombre de ventrales (environ 160 au lieu de 141-152), moins de rangs de dorsales à mi-corps (15 ou 16 au lieu de 19 à 21) et l’absence de sous-caudales divisées (Ernst & Rödel 2002, Penner et al. 2013). De même, A. hispida diffère d’A. mongoensis sp. nov. par une série de caractères dont notamment des yeux nettement plus grands (leur diamètre est environ deux fois supérieur à la distance à la lèvre), moins de rangs dorsaux à mi-corps (16 à 19) et l’absence de sous-caudales divisées (Broadley 1998). Les autres espèces d’Afrique occidentale et centrale diffèrent d’A. mongoensis sp. nov. par l’écaillure céphalique et sous-caudale, ainsi que par divers autres caractères dont notamment le nombre de rangs dorsaux pour A. chlorechis (de 27 à 37), A. nitschei (de 23 à 34) et A. katangensis (de 23 à 31), le contact de l’œil avec les supralabiales et le petit nombre de rangs dorsaux (de 14 à 16) pour A. subocularis, et la coloration céphalique ainsi que la présence d’un seul rang de sous- oculaires dans les deux sexes pour A. broadleyi (Lawson 1999, Lawson et al. 2001, Broadley 2008). Concernant A. squamigera et A. anisolepis, les deux espèces d’Afrique centrale dont la répartition géographique comprend l’ouest de la RDC et dont Lawson et Ustach (2000) avaient proposé la synonymie, la comparaison de nos spécimens de RDC montre d’une part que ceux attribuables à A. squamigera et à A. anisolepis appartiennent bien à deux espèces distinctes, ainsi que l’indiquait Broadley (2008), et qu’ils diffèrent d’A. mongoensis sp. nov., outre par l’absence de sous-caudales divisées (Figs 16-18) et d’écailles céphaliques lancéolées et dressées, par les caractères suivants (Tableau I) : pour A. squamigera par la présence d’un seul rang de sous-oculaires dans les deux sexes (habituellement deux rangs complets chez les femelles d’A. anisolepis et d’A. mongoensis sp. nov., le deuxième rang habituellement incomplet chez les mâles d’A. anisolepis et absent chez ceux d’A. mongoensis sp. nov.); pour A. anisolepis par un nombre supérieur de rangs de dorsales chez les femelles (23 - 25), un plus grand nombre de ventrales dans les deux sexes (153 – 170), et la présence habituelle de cinq suprarostrales (seulement trois chez A. squamigera et A. mongoensis sp. nov.) et de trois écailles entre la nasale et l’œil (seulement deux chez A. squamigera et A. mongoensis sp. nov.).
Protobothrops kelomohy	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. differs from other species of the genus by the combination of the following characters: 1) relative larger body size (TL up to 1310 mm); 2) dorsal scale rows 23– 23–17, all keeled; 3) ventral scales 231-234; 4) high number of subcaudals (80-84 pairs); 5) 8-9 supralabials; 6) 12-13 infralabials; 7) typical lance-head pattern on upper head surface; 8) three bold vertical facial stripes, (first from internasal, second from facial pit, third from eye) and a bold postocular stripe extending obliquely downwards on temporal region then curved down immediately at the end of the last supralabial; 9) dorsal body and tail reddish-brown, each scale with black edges; transverse blotches, somewhat fused together as a zigzag median line on dorsum and a row of large ventrolateral blotches on each side, each darker marking edged with a narrow yellow line.Comparisons. A comparison of Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. with the other species of genus Protobothrops is shown in Table 5. The absence of a hornlike supraocular in Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. easily distinguishes it from P. cornutus and P. sieversorum; by its high number of ventrals, greater than 200, Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. (231-234) differs from P . dabieshanensis (187), P . elegans (179-196), P. jerdonii jerdonii (160-173), P. jerdonii bourreti (189-192), P. jerdonii xanthomelas (176-188), P. mangshanensis (187-198), P . maolanensis (186-193), P . trungkhanhensis (188-194) and P . xiangchengensis (175-194); by its lesser number of mid-body scale rows, Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. (23) differs from P . flavoviridis (33-39), P. himalayanus (25), P . kaulbacki (25) and P . tokarensis (31-33). Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. differs from P. mucrosquamatus by the number of mid-body dorsal scale rows, 23, all keeled distinctly vs 25 – 27 (rarely 23) and keeled, except the 1st row smooth in P. mucrosquamatus, one loreal (vs two) and the presence of vertical stripes from eyes (vs absent). Furthermore, Protobothrops kelomohy sp. nov. is slightly longer, has higher numbers of ventrals, supralabials and infralabials than P. mucrosquamatus (TL max 1,310 mm vs 1,280 mm, V 231 – 234 vs194–233,SL8–9vs7–8,IL12–13 vs 11 – 12) (Table 5 in Sumontha et al. 2020).
Trimeresurus salazar	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus with (1) 1st supralabial fused with nasal; (2) 19–21 moderately keeled dorsal scale rows at midbody; (3) dorsal colouration greenish yellow in both sexes; (4) an orange to reddish stripe extends from the posterior borders of the preocular, running through the lower margin of the eyes to the lateral side of the nape in males; (5) ventrolateral stripe predominantly yellow with a faint orange at the base in males, yellow in females; (6) tail to total length ratio (TaL/TL) 0.18 in males, 0.14 in females; (7) short, bilobed hemipenis reaching 8th caudal scale; (8) 6 palatine, 15 pterygoid and 19 dentary teeth.Comparison. The new species is here compared to all species of the genus Trimeresurus for differing and non-overlapping characters: first supralabial fused with nasal (vs separate in T. macrolepis Beddome, 1862, T. trigonocephalus (Latreille, 1801), T. malabaricus (Jerdon, 1854), T. strigatus Gray, 1842, T. gramineus (Shaw, 1802), T. stejnegeri Schmidt, 1925, T. hageni (Lidth de Jeude, 1886), T. phuketensis Sumontha, Kunya, Pauwels, Nitikul & Punnadee, 2011, T. nebularis Vogel, David & Pawels, 2004, T. truongsonensis Orlov, Ryabov, Thanh & H. Cuc, 2004, T. gunaleni Vogel, David & Sidik, 2014, T. sabahi Regenass & Kramer, 1981, T. popeorum, T. yingjiangensis Chen, Zhang, Shi, Tang, Guo, Song & Ding, 2019, T. sichuanensis (Guo & Wang, 2011), T. nebularis Vogel, David & Pauwels, 2004, and T. yunnanensis); dorsal scale rows 19–21 (vs >23 rows in T. andersoni Theobald, 1868, T. cantori (Blyth, 1846), T. erythrurus, T. gracilis Oshima, 1920, T. gumprechti, T. labialis (Steindachner, 1867), T. purpureomaculatus (Gray, 1832), T. vogeli David, Vidal & Pawels, 2001, T. stejnegeri, and T. arunachalensis); eye sized in relation to head not large, DEYE 2.33 (DEYE 4.03–4.46 relatively large eyes in T. cardomomensis Malhotra, Thrope, Mrinalini & Staurt, 2011, T. macrops Karmer, 1977, and T. rubeus Malhotra, Thrope, Mrinalini & Staurt, 2011), dorsum green with a yellow tinge bearing a yellowish ventrolateral stripe along the body lacking any dorsal markings (vs dorsum reddish brown to grey, black, or green with dark markings in T. tibetanus Huang, 1982, T. flavomaculatus (Gray, 1842), T. fasciatus (Boulenger, 1896), T. arunachalensis, T. malabaricus, T. strigatus, T. kanburiensis Smith, 1943, T. puniceus (Boie, 1827), T. schultzei Griffin, 1909, T. mutabilis Stoliczka, 1870, T. honsonensis (Grismer, Ngo & Grismer, 2008), T. malcolmi Loveridge, 1938, T. wiroti Trutnau, 1981, T. venustus, Vogel, 1991, T. mcgregori Taylor, 1919, T. sumatranus (Raffles, 1822), T. andersonii, T. labialis, T. andalasensis David, Vogel, Vijaykumar & Vidal, 2006, T. borneensis (Peters, 1872), T. brongersmai Hoge, 1968, T. cantori); 167–171 ventrals (vs 136–150 in T. brongersmai, 141–149 in T. gracilis, 133–143 in T. macrolepis, 143–158 in T. malabaricus, 138–149 in T. medoensis, and 128–150 in T. strigatus).The new species is most similar to T. septentrionalis, T. insularis Kramer, 1977, and T. albolabris in its scalation but differs in bearing an orange to reddish stripe from the lower margin of the eye to the posterior of the posterior border of the mouth in males (vs a white stripe from the posterior border of the nasal to posterior part of the head in T. septentrionalis and T. albolabris); hemipenis short and bilobed (vs long and deeply forked in T. septentrionalis and T. albolabris); palatine with six teeth (vs five in T. albolabris, T. insularis, and T. septentrionalis); pterygoid with 15 teeth (vs 11 in T. septentrionalis, 16 in T. insularis, and 12 in T. albolabris); 19 dentary teeth (vs 11 in T. septentrionalis, 12 in T. albolabris, and 14 in T. insularis). A comparison of selected characters is presented in Table 1 (Mirza et al. 2020).Description and Variation (based on examined specimens). Body moderately elongate, slender; head elongate, triangular, flattened, broadest width occurs from eyes to end of the head just before the starting of neck, over twice as long as broad, clearly distinct from neck; snout moderate, overall flattened from top and side view, rounded from top view, truncate when seen from lateral side, one third of total head length, twice as long as diameter of eye, canthus rostralis distinct; eye moderate; tail typically cylindrical in cross section fairly short, prehensile, tapering. SVL: 459–565 mm; TaL: 92–116 mm; TL: 571–659 mm; HL: 21.01–26.93 mm, HW 10.05–16.34 mm; ratio TaL/TL: 0.193–0.196 in males and 0.143–0.152 in females; VEN: 163–170; PV 2–3; SC: 62–73 pairs in males, 56–59 pairs in females; anal entire. DSR: 19–23:21:15–17 scales, rhomboid, moderately keeled, first row smooth. Rostral visible from above, one and a half times broader than high, triangular; nasal+first supralabial pentagonal, about as broad as high, undivided, nostril in the middle; one pair of enlarged internasals, in good contact with each other, slightly broader than long, about 4 times larger than adjacent upper snout scales; canthal scales between the internasal and corresponding supraocular, slightly larger than adjacent snout scales; 1 triangular loreal between lower preocular and second supralabial; two upper preoculars above the loreal pit, elongated, lower in contact with the loreal; lower preocular forms posterior-upper margin of loreal pit; 2/2 postoculars; 1 large, entire, long and narrow supraocular on each side; supraocular lightly indented on their inner margin by the upper head scales; scales on upper snout surface smooth, juxtaposed, irregular in shape, moderately but distinctly enlarged, typically looking like a juxtaposition of irregular paving stones; only 3 snout scales between internasals and supraoculars; cephalic and occipital scales smaller, irregular, juxtaposed, smooth and flat on upper head surface, scales confined on middle and occipital area slightly smaller than snout scales; temporal scales larger than cephalic and occipital scales, lightly swollen but not keeled; 10–12 cephalic scales in a line between supraoculars; 10/11 SL; 1st SL completely fused with nasal, forms irregular pentagonal shape, about as broad as high; 2nd SL high, slightly shorter than nasal+1 SL, forms the anterior border of loreal pit, 3rd SL largest, longest of all, about twice as long as 2nd SL, longer than high, in contact with the subocular; 4th SL distinctly shorter, more than 2/3 times as high as 3rd one, 5th and other posterior SL slightly smaller than 4th; both 4th and 5th SL separated from the subocular by one scale row, others in contact with the first lowest row of temporals; 11/13 IL, first pair in contact with each other behind mental, the first three pairs in contact with the anterior chin shields; 4/4+1 smooth gular scales; posterior chin shields nearly half of anterior chin shields. In life, green or yellowish green to yellow above. In preservative, the upper and lateral body surfaces uniformly dark brown or bluish. Ventrolateral stripe distinct; off-white or yellow (CESS535) in colour; the stripes largely restricted to last row of dorsal scales, not extending on to the edges of ventral scales. Ventral scales predominantly yellow and often outlined with dark brown. Upper and lower lip as yellowish as underside. A dark brown eye streak of about one scale breadth passing from upper of 2nd SL, upper of 3rd SL to scale row below suture to last 4 SL and finally forms the dark ventrolateral line below yellow-white line. More than half of tail rusty red which gradually turns darker towards tip. Eyes with greenish yellow iris and black vertically elliptical pupil. Tongue blackish pink, with tips slightly darker. (Vogel et al. 2022)The original description states that ventral scales in T. salazar range from 163–171, and that subcaudals range from 59–74 (sexes pooled). Rathee et al. (2021) reported the counts as 164–170 and 68–70 respectively. In the specimens studied by Vogel et al. 2022, the corresponding ranges were 163–170 and 56–73, falling within the reported range (Mirza et al. 2020; Rathee et al. 2021).
Trimeresurus caudornatus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: (1) Head and body generally dark green, postocular stripes absent in both genders, upper labials light green; (2) ventrolateral stripe faint green yellow, present on the first row of DSR in both genders; (3) iris golden yellow in both genders; (4) dorsal tail mostly dark red, lateral and ventral green; an orange red stripe along the ventral part of the tail; (5) DSR 21/22 –21–15 (n=2), VEN 161–163, SC 52–72; (6) Cep 10, first upper labial partially fused to the nasal; (7) hemipenes elongated, bilobed at 6th plate, tips reaching SC 37–38, small spines present posterior to the bifurcation, sulcus spermaticus shallow, visible, divides at the base of the organ.Comparison. Trimeresurus caudornatus sp. nov. is referred to subgenus Trimeresurus by the “Long papillose” hemipenis (Malhotra & Thorpe 2004 as Crypelytrops). Main characters separating it from T. albolabris and T. septentrionalis are presented in Tables 5 and 6.We compared the type series of T. caudornatus sp. nov. with 46 specimens of T. albolabris (see Appendix I). These specimens originated from various localities in China, Vietnam, Thailand and Indonesia. Specimens from India and Myanmar were not included as they differ morphologically from T. albolabris from and near type locality, additionally systematic work further confirm these specimens should not be allocated to T. albolabris. T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. albolabris by: (1) hemipenes relatively longer, reaching 37 or 38th SC vs extending to the 15th SC (Guo & Zhang 2000); (2) an orange red stripe presented on the ventral part of the tail vs absent in the latter species; (3) ventrolateral stripe very faint, green yellow vs lateral stripe yellow or white; and (4) upper labials light green vs usually yellow or white.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. septentrionalis by: (1) dorsal tail dark red, ventral tail with an orange red stripe vs “tail above bright red, belly light yellowish-green” (examined topotypes, Sharma et al. 2013). (2) fewer ventrals in males and females (163 for the male, 161 for the female) vs 164–170 in males and 166–171 in females. (3) fewer subcaudals (72 in the male, 52 in the female) vs 74–80 in males and 56–66 in females. (4) upper labials light green vs usually yellow or white. (5) ventrolateral stripe faint green yellow in both gender vs white in males.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. insularis by: (1) The hemipenes forked at 6th plate with about 12 rows of small spines presented posterior to the bifurcation, tips reaching the 37–38th SC vs forked opposite 3rd plate with spongy structure to the end and reaching the 23th SC (examined type specimens, Kramer 1977). (2) An orange red stripe presented on the ventral part of the tail vs no stripe on the ventral part of the tail. (3) DSR weakly keeled expect the first two rows vs strongly keeled except the first row. (4) Tail relatively shorter, TaL/TL in the male 0.185 vs 0.214–0.224. (5) Usually more supralabials 10 (11) vs 11–13. (6) Upper labials light green vs usually yellow or white.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. erythrurus by: (1) lesser dorsal scales, 21 rows at mid-body vs usually 23–25 rows. (2) Head scales not or weakly keeled vs strongly keeled. (3) More subcaudals in males (72 vs 49–71). (4) An orange red stripe presented on the ventral part of the tail vs no stripe on the ventral part of the tail. (5) A very faint green yellow ventrolateral stripe vs a thin white line present in males and in most females.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. purpureomaculatus by: (1) first upper labials partially fused to the nasal vs “almost completely united with first upper labial”. (2) The hemipenes forked at 6th plate with about 12 rows of small spines presented after the bifurcation and reaching the 37–38 SC vs forked opposite 3rd plate entirely devoid of spines and reaching the 20th SC. (3) Scales in 21 longitudinal rows at mid-body and with lesser DSR vs 25–27 (29). (4) Head scales not or weakly keeled vs strongly keeled. (5) Basic color green vs usually not green (except some specimens from Sumatra). (6) Upper labials light green vs usually not lighter than body but in some populations yellow. (7) Lower number of Cep, 10 vs 13–18 (11).T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. macrops, T. rubeus and T. cardamomensis by: (1) No postocular streak in both gender vs prominent in males. (2) ventrolateral stripe very faint, green yellow vs prominent, white in males. (3) an orange red stripe presented on the ventral part of the tail vs no stripe on the ventral part of the tail. (4) Head more elongated. (5) The supraoculars are narrower. T. caudornatus sp. nov. further differs from T. rubeus by iris golden yellow vs deep red.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. cantori: (1) Fewer DSR (21 vs 25–29), (2) Fewer SL (10 vs 11–13, only very exceptionally 11. (3) Fewer Cep (10 vs 13–17). (4) Fewer ventrals (161–163 vs 170–182). (5) the new species much slender than T. cantori (Vijayakumar & David 2006). Only one of three-color morphs of T. cantori is uniformly green.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. fasciatus: (1) Dorsal body dark green with faint dark crossbands on the skin vs brownish-grey with olivaceous brown or dark brown crossbands on the back (examined topotypes David et al. 2003). (2) Venter pale green yellow and dorsal tail dark red vs “venter pale greyish brown or brown, heavily speckled with dark brown, anterior part and tip of ventrals nearly totally dark brown”. (3) tail relatively shorter in both gender, TaL/TL in the male/female 0.185/0.153 vs 0.202–0.210/0.183-0.198. (4) Internasals broad trapezoidal, broadly in contact vs “separated from each other by one scale” (David et al. 2003; examined specimens, Appendix I). Additionally, T. fasciatus is endemic to Tanahjampea Island.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. andersoni: (1) Body uniform dark green vs color above and below variable, usually brown, buff or blackish. (2) Fewer DSR at midbody (21 vs 23 to 25, rarely 21). (3) Fewer ventrals (161–163 vs 171–183) (Gumprecht et al. 2004). Additionally, T. andersoni is endemic to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.T. caudornatus sp. nov. is distinct from T. labialis, Trimeresurus honsonensis, T. venustus and T. kanburiensis by the body color and pattern. The body uniform dark green and with a faint dark crossbands on skin in T. caudornatus sp. nov. while brown in T. labialis (Vogel et al. 2014), green patterned with spotted brownish speckles in T. honsonensis, T. venustus (Vogel 1991) and T. kanburiensis (David et al. 2004).
Atheris hetfieldi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The newly described species can be distinguished from all other members of the genus by a combi- nation of characters: 1) “horns” above the eyes absent; 2) one or two rows of scales between the eyes and supralabi- als; 3) lack of lanceolate or acuminate scales on top of the head; 4) lack of conspicuous lateral and/or dorsal mark- ings on the head; 5) 23 to 25 dorsal scale rows at midbody; 6) 153 ventral scales; 7) 47 to 50 undivided subcaudals; 8) four suprarostrals; 9) 10 interorbitals and 19–20 interrictals; 10) a background dorsal coloration brownish-green, with a series of large transverse dark markings.Specifically, regarding the more geographically proximate species of the genus, the newly described species can be easily distinguished from the sympatric A. squamigera by having four suprarostrals (usually three in A. squami- gera, see Fig. 4), three scales between the eye and the nasal (two in A. squamigera), and an higher number of inter- rictals (19–20 in Atheris hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 14 to 16 in A. squamigera); it can be distinguished from the phe- netically similar West African Atheris chlorechis by having 23 to 25 midbody scale rows (25–37 in A. chlorechis), a brownish-green coloration pattern with dark brown marking on the dorsum (uniformly leaf green in A. chlorechis), and four suprarostrals of different sizes (the outer two much larger that the inner two in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus four irregular but small and about the same size in A. chlorechis), and a smaller number of interrictals (19–20 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 25–27 in A. chlorechis). It can be immediately distinguished from A. subocularis by having one or two rows of scales between eye and supralabials (eye in direct contact with supralabials in A. subocularis). It differs from A. mongoensis in having 23 to 25 midbody scales rows (19–21 in A. mongoensis), a higher number of ventral scales (153 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 141–152 in A. mongoensis), and in having undivided subcaudals (divided in the posterior part of the tail in A. mongoensis). It can be distinguished from A. broadleyi by lacking a conspicuous dark band between the posterior part of the eye and the corner of the mouth (usually present in A. broadleyi), by having one or two rows of scales between eye and supralabials (suboculars always in direct contact with supralabials in A. broadleyi), by having four suprarostrals (only three in A. broadleyi); a higher number of in- teroculars (10–12 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 3–8 in A. broadleyi), and a higher number of interrictals (19–20 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 14–18 in A. broadleyi). The new species differs from A. anisolepis by having a higher number of interorbitals (10–12 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov, versus 6–8 in A. anisolepis), a higher number of interrictals (19–20 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 14 –18 in A. anisolepis), and by having four suprarostrals (usually three in A. anisolepis). Finally, it can be easily distinguished from A. hirsuta by lacking lanceolate or acuminate scales on top of the head (a distinctive “hairy” appearance in A. hirsuta) by having three scales between the eye and the nasal (two in A. hirsuta), and by having 23–25 midbody scale rows (16 in A. hirsuta).Besides the obvious geographic distribution gap, the newly described species can be distinguished from their central and eastern African congeners by the following characters: it can be immediately distinguished from A. ceratophora and A. matildae by the lack of supraocular scales similar to “horns”; it can be distinguished from A. hispida and H. acuminata by lacking lanceolate or acuminate scales on top of the head (a distinctive “hairy” appear- ance in A. hispida and A. acuminata); it can be distinguished from A. desaixi by not having lateral scales serrated, having 20 interrictals (22 in A. desaixi), a lower number of ventrals (153 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 164 –168 in A. desaixi), and by having a dark-green background dorsal coloration (black in A. desaixi); from A. nitschei by lacking black arrowhead markings on the top of the head and black lateral stripe from the tip of snout, through the eye to the temporal region (typical of A. nitschei); from A. rungweensis by having a lower number of interrictals (20 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 24–26 in A. rungweensis), by having four suprarostrals (usually three in A. run- gweensis) and by lacking the typical yellow dorsolateral zig-zag lines and yellowish markings on the labials; from A. katangensis by having a higher number of ventrals (153 versus 133–144 in A. katangensis) and lacking serrations on the lateral scales (serrated in A. katangensis); from A. barbouri by having a prehensile tail (non-prehensile tail in A. barbouri; see Spawls & Branch 2020), a higher number of ventrals (153 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 115–127 in A. barbouri), a higher number of subcaudals (47–50 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 15–23 in A. barbouri), a con- siderably greater maximum known total length (52 cm in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 36.9 cm in A. barbouri); and from A. mabuensis by its greater maximum known total length (52 cm in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 38.4 cm in A. mabuensis), by having one or two rows of scales between eye and supralabials (suboculars in direct contact with supralabials in A. mabuensis), and a higher number of ventrals (153 in A. hetfieldi sp. nov. versus 128–137 in A. mabuensis).Variation. Variation in measurements and scalation of the paratypes of A. hetfieldi sp. nov. is presented in Table 1. The paratype agrees in general with the holotype, although it has only one row of scales between the eye and the supralabials (two in the holotype) and a higher number of neck, midbody and caudal scale rows, and interoculars (see Table 1 in Ceriaco et al. 2020).
Trimeresurus davidi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Trimeresurus davidi sp. nov. is an arboreal member of the genus Trimeresurus restricted to the Car Nicobar Island of the Nicobar archipelago, characterized by: medium to large sized body (277–835 mm SVL); dorsal scales in a series of 21–25:21–23:15–17 rows; nasal partly fused with the first supralabial; 166–179 ventrals; 46–70 subcaudals; one preocular; 2–3 postoculars; 10–12 supralabials; 12–15 infralabials; two internasals usually in contact with each other; 11–14 cephalic scales; relative tail length (TaL/TL) ranging from 0.143–0.20; dorsal and ventral verdant green in color, lacking white ventrolateral stripes; males with a white supralabial streak, bordered by a reddish tinge above; a pair of white and red stripes along the sides of the tail in both males and females; a reddish brown colored tail and a greenish iris; hemipenis reaching the 13th caudal plate.Variation: Measurements and scale counts of the paratypes and referred material are given in Table 1. Mid-body scale rows range from 21–25:21–23:15–17; ventrals range from 170–179 in males and 166–178 in females. Subcaudals range from 67–70 in males and 55– 64 in females. Internasals usually in contact with each other, but separated by a small scale in one specimen. Cephalic scales range from 11–14; postoculars range from 2–3. Relative tail length in males: 0.178–0.200; in females: 0.143–0.161. Sexual dimorphism apparent in body for the tail dimensions and the number of subcaudals. Verdant green colored in life, both dorsally and ventrally, without a white ventrolateral pair of stripes along the sides of the body; but with a pair of white and red lateral stripes along the sides of the tail. Males have a thin white labial stripe bordered by red above the supralabials on either side of the head (absent in females) and a white stripe bordered by red along the subcaudals from the vent until about half the length of the tail (also present in females).Comparison. Trimeresurus davidi sp. nov. does not have any superficially similar looking, green-colored arboreal congeners on Car Nicobar Island, on which its distribution is restricted. It can be distinguished from other members of the T. albolabris complex by the following combination of characters: dorsal scales of T. davidi sp. nov. in 21–25:21–23:15–17 rows (vs. 21– 23:19–21:15inT.albolabrisandT.insularis,21:21:15 in T. caudornatus, 21:19:17 in T. septentrionalis, and 21:19:15 in T. salazar). There is some overlap in this character, as is expected; however, five of the 11 (45%) examined T. davidi specimens had 23 dorsal scale rows at midbody. This character has never been recorded in any of the other species within this complex. Also, there seems to be a certain degree of overlap in scalation characters between the currently recognized members of T. albolabris complex, which makes the partially overlapping values with T. davidi sp. nov. quite understandable. Trimeresurus davidi sp. nov. has 166– 179 ventrals (vs. 149–173 in T. albolabris, 161–163 in T. caudornatus, 160–181 in T. septentrionalis, 156–167 in T. insularis, and 163–171 in T. salazar); an absence of white ventrolateral stripes along the body in T. davidi sp. nov. (vs. present in T. septentrionalis and T. salazar); and the presence of a pair of red and white ventrolateral stripes along the sides of the tail (vs. absent in all other species). Trimeresurus davidi sp. nov. is considerably larger than all other species of this complex. For further comparisons, see also the morphological characters (Table 2) for the material examined (Appendix 1) in this study.From the two other sympatric congeners, T. andersoni Theobald, 1868 and T. labialis Fitzinger in: Steindachner, 1867, T. davidi sp. nov. can be distinguished by its verdant green dorsal coloration (vs. predominantly brown in both T. andersoni and T. labialis); midbody dorsal scales in 21–23 rows (vs. 23–25 in T. andersoni, 23 in T. labialis); and the first supralabial united with the nasal in T. davidi sp. nov. (vs. separate in T. labialis).Additionally, from the green color morph of Trimeresurus cantori (Blyth 1846) which occurs on islands of the central group of the Nicobar archipelago, T. davidi sp. nov. can be distinguished by a lower number of mid-body scale rows (21–23 in T. davidi sp. nov. vs. 25–29 in T. cantori); and the absence of a pair of white ventro-lateral stripes along the sides of the body in T. davidi sp. nov. (vs. present in T. cantori) [Whitaker and Captain 2008].Description and Variation: see also Vogel et al. 2022: 354.
Trimeresurus guoi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: (1) Dorsal body jungle-green with faint transverse dark bands on skin, ventral body yellow green. (2) Lateral head jungle-green above lower margin of eyes, and green yellow below, without postocular stripes. (3) Ventrolateral line of male yellow-green, narrow, only present on outermost row of dorsal scales. (4) Iris firebrick-red in both sexes. (5) First supralabial fused with nasal. (6) Head scales feebly keeled; dorsal scale row 23-21-15 (N = 10), feebly keeled except the outermost rows;ventral scale 154–163 in males (N = 6), 158–160 in females (N =3); subcaudal scale 58–72 in males (N = 7), 52–59 in females (N= 3). (7) Hemipenes long, reaching 23rd/32nd subcaudals when unextruded/extruded, papillae relatively weak and sparse. (CHEN et al. 2021).Comparisons: The new species morphologically differs from T. albolabris in the yellow green ventral color; an indistinct ventrolateral line; the absence of a postocular stripe; the firebrickred iris; a dark red stripe on dorsal tail; hemipenes with relatively weak sparse papillae, reaching 23rd subcaudal when unextruded. For additional detailed comparisons see CHEN et al. 2021.Color in life: Dorsal head and body jungle green. Lateral head jungle-green above lower margin of eyes, and green-yellow below, without postocular stripes. Dark transverse bands the width of one to three dorsal scales present on body,. Lateral body mostly jungle-green, gradually lighter from spine to ventrals. First row of dorsal scales grass-green, with a narrow green-yellow longitudinal stripe, which forms a faint green-yellow ventrolateral line. Ventral body yellow-green, becoming lighter in color anteriorly. Tail with a dark red longitudinal stripe in inner two rows of dorsal scales, other dorsal scales on tail jungle-green. Most SC green-yellow, posterior one third gradually dark red. Iris firebrick-red, pupils edged with lighter color. Tone coloration maroon (CHEN et al. 2021).
Bothrops oligobalius	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: (1) A robust body species, SVL = 245–805 mm, (2) short tail, TL = 35–113 mm; (3) 23–27 dorsals on the first third of the body; (4) 23–25 dorsals at midbody; (5) 18–21 dorsals on the last third of the body; (6) 156–164 ventrals in females (median = 160) and 154–159 in males (median = 156); (7) anal scale not divided; (8) 42–48 paired subcaudals in females (median = 44.5) and 47–52 in males (median = 48.8); (9) 9–13 lateral trapezoidal marks in each side (median = 11,01 and 11,7 on the right and left side, respectively); (10) post- orbital stripe absent or poorly marked; (11) eight supralabials; (12) 10–12 infralabials; (13) second supralabial fused to the prelacunal; (14) belly checkered; (15) absence of vertebral stripe.Comparisons: Comparisons for meristic and qualitative characters are presented in Table 1. Attributes from other species are presented in parenthesis. The new species can be promptly assigned to the jararacussu group due its morphological similarities with B. brazili, with whom theLike other members in the jararacussu group, the new species presents the second labial scale fused to the prelacunal (separate in the alternatus and neuwiedi groups), postorbital stripe absent or faint (present in the alternatus, neuwiedi, atrox and jararaca groups), dorsal skin of the head with homogeneous colouration (blotched or patterned in the alternatus and neuwiedi groups and generally in the atrox group as well), stout and cylindrical bodies and terrestrial habit (slender, laterally com- pressed and arboreal habit in the taeniatus group), reddish and greyish background skin colouration and reddish eye (greenish background colour in the taeniatus group, skin generally brownish in the atrox, jararaca, alternatus and neuwiedi groups), eight supralabials and lower number of ventrals (generally 7 supralabials and higher number of ventrals in atrox group). Assignment of B. oligobalius to the jararacussu group is further supported by our molecular approach (Figure 1).Within the jararacussu species group, Bothrops oligobalius can be distinguished from B. jararacussu and B. pirajai by the absence or a faint postorbital stripe (present in both species), greyish and reddish background skin colouration (yellowish or brownish back- ground with black trapezoidal marks in both species), reddish eye (yellowish or brownish in both species). The number of ventrals in B. oligobalius (156–164 in females, 154–159 in males) distinguishes it from B. muriciensis (151–155 in females, 148–150 in males) and B. jararacussu (170–186 in females, 166–181 in males) (Table 1). The phylogenetic position of B. oligobalius sister to a clade assembling B. jararacussu, B. pirajai and B. muriciensis (which correspond to the Atlantic Forest lineage in the jararacussu group) is further supported by high genetic divergence and highly disjunct distributions (Figure 1).Bothrops oligobalius is similar to B. brazili in background skin colouration and general external morphology features. However, the species can be promptly distin- guished from B. brazili due to a smaller number of lateral trapezoidal marks (9–13; mean = 11.01 and 11.7 on the right and left side, respectively; in B. brazili, 13–21 mean = 17.1 and 16.3 on the right and left side, respectively) and absence of a vertebral stripe (present in B. brazili) (Table 1, Figures 2, Figures 3, Figures 5 and Figures 8). Moreover, the low number of ventrals (156–164 in females and 154–159 in males), and subcaudals 42–48 in females and 47–52 in males in B. oligobalius also distinguish it from B. brazili (ventrals 174–186 in females and 175–184 in males, and subcaudals 45–56 in females and 54–61 in males) (Table 1). Molecular analysis recovered these two species as non-sister lineage, with pronounced genetic dis- tances between them. Moreover, the new species occurs north of the Amazon River, while B. brazili is restricted to areas south of the river, with no reported sympatry (Figures 6, Figures 8).Lastly, the new species is distinguished from B. sanctaecrucis, a poorly known member of the jararacussu group from Bolivia, by the lower number of ventrals and caudals (171–185 and 56–57 respectively in B. sanctaecrucis), lower number of lateral trapezoidal marks (18–21), and greyish to reddish background skin colouration (brownish to yellowish).
Trimeresurus kuiburi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Trimeresurus kuiburi sp. nov. can be distinguished from all other congeneric species by the combination of its red/purple bands on a green dorsum; white concave suborbital stripe in males; white, spaced vertebral dots in males; pale green belly lacking dark dots or stripe on the lateral sides of the ventrals; partially fused 1st supralabial and nasal scale; 19 dorsal scale rows at midbody; 164–171 ventrals; 63–65 subcaudals in males, 51–53 in females; maximal known SVL of 451 mm; and long, papillose hemipenes. (Sumontha et al. 2021).Comparisons: Among these species, Trimeresurus kuiburi sp. nov. is readily distinguished from the widespread Trimeresurus albolabris, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands endemic T. andersonii, the Nicobar Archipelago endemics T. cantori, T. davidi, T. labialis and T. mutabilis, the Cardamom Mounts endemic T. cardamomensis, the Chinese T. caudornatus, the Indo-Burmese T. erythrurus, the Indonesian Tanahdjampea Island endemic T. fasciatus, the widespread T. guoi, the Vietnamese Hon Son Island endemic T. honsonensis, the Indonesian T. insularis, the Southeast Asian T. macrops, the southern Vietnamese-Cambodian T. rubeus, the Indian T. salazar and the Himalayan T. septentrionalis by its dorsal pattern made of purple-red bands on a green background (David & Vogel 2000; David et al. 2003; Grismer et al. 2008; Malhotra et al. 2011; Vogel et al. 2014; Chandramouli et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020 a–b; Mirza et al. 2020). Its 19 MSR further separate it from Trimeresurus andersonii (21 MSR), T. cantori (27, 29 or 31), T. cardamomensis (21), T. caudornatus (21), T. davidi (21 or 23), T. erythrurus (23 or 25), T. fasciatus (21), T. guoi (21), T. honsonensis (21), T. insularis (21), T. labialis (21 or 23), T. macrops (21), T. mutabilis (21), T. purpureomaculatus (23–29), T. rubeus (21), T. septentrionalis (21) and most specimens of T. venustus (21, rarely 19). (Sumontha et al. 2021).Color in life: Dorsal surface of head dark green with many scales also partly or entirely dark red, especially on the snout, and the interorbital, temporal and occipital regions. A contrasting white stripe begins under the loreal pit, forms a concave curve under the eye, then continues straight from the 7th to the last supralabial where it stops. Black vertical pupil; iris copper. The background color of the dorsum is dark green, similar to that of the head, with about 62 irregular, dark red crossbands. These red bands are about two dorsal scales long mediodorsally, but narrower on the lower flanks where they are about one dorsal scale long. At the level of the vertebral row, the red bands are generally separated by one dorsal scale. The vertebral row exhibits an interrupted line of white dots, spaced by five or six dorsal scales. Each scale of the lowest dorsal scale row shows a horizontally elongate white spot, forming a continuous white line from the neck to the end of the tail. Most of the scales of the first row also exhibit a smaller red dot, forming a dotted red line. Above the white stripe of the first dorsal scale row, the tail is red, except some thin lighter bands. The infralabials are green and white; the underside of the head is mostly white. The belly is uniformly pale green, of a lighter tone than the background color of the dorsum. (Sumontha et al. 2021).
Gloydius lipipengi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: The specimens of the new species, IVPP OV 2720, IVPP OV 2725 and IVPP OV 2726 were identified as the member of the genus Gloydius based on the small body size, bilateral pits, and divided subcaudal scales (Hoge and Romano- Hoge 1981).  Gloydius lipipengi sp. nov. differs from other congeneric species in the following characteristics: i) third supralabial scale not touching the orbit; ii) a pair of prominent black markings on the occiput; iii) black-bordered greyish cheek stripe extending from the posterior margin of orbit (not separated by the postoculars) to the ventral surface of the neck; iv) black irregular annular crossbands on the mid-body; iv) two rows of black blotches on the ventral side; v) 23-21-15 circum-body scales; vi) 165 ventral scales; and vii) 46 subcaudal scales.  (Shi et al. 2021). Comparisons: Gloydius lipipengi sp. nov. and G. swild sp. nov. can be differentiated from the species in the G. blomhoffii complex by having three palatine teeth (versus four palatine teeth), from the G. halys complex by having 21 rows of mid-body dorsal scales (versus 22 or 23 rows). Gloydius lipipengi sp. nov. differs from other species in G. strauchi complex by the third supralabial scale not touching the orbit, from G. strauchi, G. huangi, and G. rubromaculatus by having large irregular black markings on the back (versus four irregular longitudinal stripes or discrete blotches in G. strauchi, complete dark brown patches in G. huangi, and large red crossbands in G. rubromaculatus (Wang et al. 2019), from G. monticola by having seven supralabials (versus always six supralabials) and more subcaudal scales (46 pairs versus always fewer than 30 pairs), from G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis by its greyish brown body color (versus yellowish-brown body color) and lacking a lateral white line on each lateral side (versus possessing a lateral white line on each side). Gloydius lipipengi sp. nov. can be differentiated from G. himalayanus by possessing an indistinct canthus rostralis (versus very distinct canthus rostralis; Gloyd and Conant 1990).  (Shi et al. 2021).Color in life: Eye dark brown on the upper half while black on the bottom half, pupil black, vertical with light yellow margins; postorbital stripe wide, greyish brown and black bordered on the lower edge, extending from the posterior orbit to the ventral surface of the neck; supralabials and infralabials greyish brown, scattered with very small irregularly sized black blotches. One black triangular mark on the anterodorsal head, covering the caudomedial part of prefrontals. One bold black M-shaped mark on the dorsomedial head, covering the caudal part of lateral frontals, the lateral part of parietals, merged with the postorbital stripe at the largest temporal scale (but not covering the upper postorbital). The upper postorbital white while the top part of the bottom postorbital is black (covered by the postorbital stripe). (Shi et al. 2021).
Craspedocephalus peltopelor	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis. A lineage belongs to the C. macrolepis complex. Differs from C. macrolepis in having lower dorsal scale rows 10–14 (vs. 13–19); higher ventral scale counts 150 (vs. 133–143). The new species is geographically separated from C. macrolepis by the Shencottah gap in the Southern Western Ghats. Craspedocephalus peltopelor sp. nov. (L7) has a shallow genetic divergence (3.7% at cyt b and 0.7–1.0% at 16S) from C. macrolepis (L6).Description. Holotype in good condition, dissected, with a slender, cylindrical body of snout to vent length (SVL) 263mm and a prehensile tail of length (TL) 57 mm; dorsal scales keeled with anterior dorsal scale rows (DSR) 17, mid body scale rows (MSR) 15 and posterior scale rows (PSR) 10; head prominent, of length 20.5mm, clearly distinguished from the neck with large, smooth dorsal shields on the head; rostral scale triangular with the upper side roughly half the size of the lower side with the tip visible from above; supraoculars of length 5.46 mm and frontal separated by pair of scales on both sides and nasal scales separated by three scales from above; five scales other than the pre and post ocular scales bordering the supraoculars on both sides, with three scales between the posterior edge of the supraoculars; canthus rostralis distinct with 3/3 canthal scale; three preoculars, a postocular and a thin elongated crescent shaped subocular, in contact with a small scale, encompassed by the third and fourth supralabial scale; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil, vertical diameter of the eye 2.94 mm and horizontal diameter 3.52mm; temporal scales smooth; aperture of the nostril completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and subrectangular; nasal scale bordering the first supralabial; loreal pit present in contact with the second supralabial with two scales between the nasal and the second supralabial; eight supralabials and 12 infralabials, with six scales between the last supralabial, including the last supralabial till the start of the ventral scales; 1st, 2nd and 3rd infralabial scale in contact with the first pair of genials; a gap of four scales including the posterior genials followed by 150 ventrals, laterally separated from the dorsal scale rows by a slightly broader row of dorsal scales; anal scale undivided, followed by 59 divided subcaudals scales; terminal scale on the tail larger than the previous scale, blunt at the tip.Variation. The paratype, of SVL 504mm and TL 145mm, is discoloured with a uniform dark greenish to black colour throughout the specimen in its current preservation state. It differs from the holotype with respect to pholidosis by having 14 DSR, 14 MSR, 11 PSR, 150 ventrals and 64 subcaudals; a distinct head of length 27.5 mm with supraoculars that are separated by one scale from above; two canthal scales on the canthus rostralis, and 3 cephalic scales from above; 11 infralabials on both sides.Colour in life. Dark to verdant green on the dorsal surface of the head that fades into a lighter green throughout the body dorsally up to the tail and along the lateral sides of the body including the head; a prominent, 2-scale wide, white lateral stripe runs from the creamy white mandibular region; small hints and patches of blue visible on the head and dorsal scales, with the tail tip banded with dark blue or sometimes fully covered with dark blue or black; the last 11 scale rows of the tail banded with black to dark blue and white to yellow; creamy white to yellow mentum fades into a light creamy green throughout the ventrals, sometimes separated by the white ventral stripe from the lateral part of the body.
Craspedocephalus anamallensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis. A cryptic lineage belonging to the C. malabaricus complex, this lineage (L3) is genetically divergent from C. malabaricus (L5) by 8.3% & 1.2%, and from C. travancoricus sp. nov. (L4) by 7.1% and 1.5% at cyt b and 16S respectively. This lineage is geographically isolated from C. malabaricus to the North (separated by Palghat Gap) and to the south the boundary broadly lies in the Periyar Plateau, between Gudrikal range (its southern limit) and Devarmalai (northern limit of its sister lineage C. travancoricus sp. nov.) (Mallik et al. 2021).Description. Lectotype in a generally good condition, entire with a cylindrical body of SVL 505mm and a prehensile tail of TL 87mm; dorsal scales mildly keeled with DSR 21, MSR 21 and PSR 15; head of length 29mm prominent and clearly distinguished from the neck with strongly imbricate small scales; tip of the rostral scale visible from above, with the upper end roughly half the size as the lower; divided supraoculars with nine cephalic scales between both the supraoculars; nine scales surrounding each divided pair of supraoculars on both the sides with nine scales between the posterior border of the supraoculars; distinct canthus rostralis with four scales on the canthal ridge; two preoculars and two postoculars, an elongated cresent shapend subocular; strongly keeled temporals and keels continue to be present in other head scales behind the oculars except the supralabials towards the posterior; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil of vertical diameter 3.3 mm and a horizontal diameter of 3.98 mm; nostril aperture completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and pentagonal-sub rectangular in shape, in contact with the first three canthal scales, first and second supralabial; nine supralabials and eleven infralabials, with eight scales between the edge of the mouth and the first ventral scale; 1st, 2nd and 3rd infralabial scale in contact with the first pair of genials; a gap of six scales in between the first genial and ventrals; 157 ventrals separated laterally from the body scales by a row of slightly broader dorsal scales; anal scale undivided followed by 55 divided caudals; terminal scale rounded and blunt at the tip, slightly larger than the previous scale (Mallik et al. 2021).Variation (n=10). The following characters vary within the specimens of the examined type series. Variations in pholidosis between the specimens were: supralabials 9–10 and infralabials 11–13, preoculars 2–3, ventrals 144–145 and subcaudals 50–62, about 8–12 scales between the edge of the mouth and the ventral scales; 21–22 scale rows around the neck; the post ocular stripe sometimes extends to 2 rows of scales (Mallik et al. 2021).Colour in life. Black dorsal head scales with the anterior scales with hints of light green and posterior head scales bordered with yellow, up to the postocular eye stripe, that extends untill the nape; light bluish green on the lateral parts of the head that fades into a creamy yellow to white underside, from the mandibular region up to the ventrals; ventral scales creamy yellow scales alternating with light greenish yellow scales, consecutively larger gaps between the lighter scales filled with the greenish yellow scales towards the tail these correspond to the alternating between creamy yellow and green scales in the column that separates the ventrals and dorsal scales; caudal scales yellow, bordered and often blotched with black scales; black blotches throughout the dorsum with a gap of 3–4 scale rows (Mallik et al. 2021).
Craspedocephalus travancoricus	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis. A cryptic lineage belonging to the C. malabaricus complex, this lineage (L4) is genetically divergent from C. malabaricus (L5) by 9% & 2.2% and from C. anamallensis (L3) by 7.1 & 1.5% at cyt b and  16S respectively. This lineage is also allopatric with its related taxa C. malabaricus occurring north of the Palghat Gap and is immediately allopatric with C. anamallensis distributed just north of its distribution range, north of the Shencottah Gap (Mallik et al. 2021).Description. Holotype in good condition, dissected, with a slender, cylindrical body of snout to vent length (SVL) 345 mm and a prehensile tail of length (TL) 61 mm; dorsal scales keeled with anterior dorsal scale rows (DSR) 21, mid body scale rows (MSR) 23 and posterior scale rows (PSR) 14-15; head prominent, of length 20.28 mm, clearly distinguished from the neck with small, juxtaposed dorsal scales on the head; rostral scale sub triangular with the upper side roughly half the size of the lower side with the tip visible from above supraoculars of length 3.64 mm and width 1.0 mm, separated by seven scales, between the posterior edge of the supraocular scales; canthus rostralis distinct with four canthal scales on the ridge; three preoculars, two postoculars and a thin elongated crescent shaped subocular, in contact with a small scale, encompassed by the third and fourth supralabial scale; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil, vertical diameter of the eye 2.6 mm and horizontal diameter 3.4 mm.; temporal scales mildly keeled; aperture of the nostril completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and subrectangular; nasal scale bordering the first supralabial; loreal pit present in contact with the second supralabial with two scales between the nasal and the second supralabial: nine supralabials and 11 infralabials, with nine scales between the last supralabial, including the last supralabial till the start of the ventral scales; 1st, 2nd and 3rd infralabial scale in contact with the first pair of genials; a gap of three scales including the posterior genials followed by 147 ventrals, laterally separated from the dorsal scale rows by a slightly broader row of dorsal scales; anal scale undivided, followed by 55 to 56 divided subcaudals scales; terminal scale on the tail larger than the previous scale, blunt at the tip (Mallik et al. 2021).Variation. The paratypes have SVL upto 282 mm and TL 65 mm, and differ from the holotype with respect to pholidosis by having 20 to 21 DSR, 21 MSR, 14 to 15 PSR, 157 ventrals and 55 subcaudals; three to four canthal scales on the canthus rostralis, and seven to nine cephalic scales from above; 10 to 12 infralabials on both sides (Mallik et al. 2021).Colour in life. Head dorsum almost covered with dark brown to purplish brown colour with scales bordered with light yellowish green; postocular and preocular stripe almost indistinguishable from the head dorsum colour, separated with a faded yellowish green stripe; dark brown postocular stripe about 3 scales wide, a preocular/ temporal stripe that continues to the loreal pit and ends at the supralabials below; black border markings on the labials below the suboculars and anterior supralabials; body in light faded green and brown marbled scales with 28 brown saddle shaped markings, the markings centered with faded brown marbled markings; the row dorsal of scales that meet the ventrals alternate between the dorsal marked with faded yellow and dark brown with a gap of two to three scales in between them; ventrals plain light creamish yellow; subcaudals in black with yellow blotches; tail with 13 yellowish green bands on dark brown to black; eyes silverish with a tinge of yellow, rufous red blotches throughout the eye, concentrated towards the middle, perpendicular to the pupil, almost forming a cross (Mallik et al. 2021).
Craspedocephalus occidentalis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Lineage diagnosis. A cryptic lineage (L2) belonging to the C. gramineus complex, it can be distinguished from C. gramineus s. str. (L1) as follows: lower ventral scale count 142–154 (vs. 158–179). L2 is genetically divergent from C. gramineus s. str. (L1) by 8.1 % at Cyt b and 1.0 % at16S. This lineage is possibly parapatric with respect to its far more widespread sister taxon C. gramineus, and is endemic to the Wyanad-Bramagiri-Coorg hill complex of the central Western Ghats, at higher elevations (> 1000 m MSL) (Mallik et al. 2021).Redescription (also see Pope & Pope 1933). Holotype in good condition, entire, with a slender, cylindrical body of snout to vent length (SVL) 400 mm and a prehensile tail of length (TL) 97 mm; dorsal scales keeled with anterior dorsal scale rows (DSR) 23, mid body scale rows (MSR) 21 and posterior scale rows (PSR) 15; head prominent, of length 21.5 mm, clearly distinguished from the neck with small, juxtaposed dorsal scales on the head; rostral scale sub triangular with the upper side roughly one fourth the size of the lower side with the tip visible from above; supraoculars of length 1.85 mm and width 4.15 mm, separated by eight scales, between the posterior edge of the supraocular scales; canthus rostralis distinct with four canthal scales on the ridge; two preoculars, two postoculars and a thin elongated crescent shaped subocular, in contact with a pair of scales scales that are in contact with the third and fourth supralabial scale; eye with a distinct elliptical pupil, vertical diameter of the eye 2.23 mm and horizontal diameter 2.44 mm; temporal scales mildly keeled; aperture of the nostril completely covered by the nasal scale, undivided and subrectangular; nasal scale bordering the first supralabial; loreal pit present in contact with the second supralabial with two scales between the nasal and the second supralabial; nine supralabials and 10 infralabials, with seven scales between the last supralabial, including the last supralabial up to the start of the first ventral scale; 1stand 2nd infralabial scale in contact with the first pair of genials; a gap of six scales including the posterior genials followed by 155 ventrals, laterally separated from the dorsal scale rows by a slightly broader row of dorsal scales; anal scale undivided, followed by 60 divided subcaudals scales; terminal scale on the tail larger than the previous scale, blunt at the tip (Mallik et al. 2021).Colour in life. Head and dorsum colour varies from bright green to faded dull green, with no markings on the dorsum; preocular/ temporal stripe absent; ventrals in creamish yellow to dirty white colour; the region where the ventrals meet the dorsum alternating with the ventral colour once every 2–3 scales; the colour of the dorsum and ventrals divides exactly at the pre/postocular stripe area, with an absence of a dark stripe (as opposed to C. gramineus) (Mallik et al. 2021).
Metlapilcoatlus borealis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Metlapilcoatlus borealis is a medium-sized, moderately robust viper (TL: males 657 mm, females 594 mm), has 22–25 rows of scales over the mid part of the body, nasorostral scales 4–6, ventrals 130–132, subcaudals 26–35, supraoculars 8–10, interoculabial 2–3, scales from 21–26 shields at the sides of the body before the cloaca. Additionally, Metlapilcoatlus borealis possess three unique nucleotides for cyt b at positions 21 (C) 369 (A), 378 (A); and three for ND4 at positions 192 (C), 405 (G), and 459 (T) (Tepos-Ramírez et al. 2021).Comparisons: Externally, M. borealis can be distinguished from M. indomitus by having fewer ventral scales (130–132 vs. 133–142); in addition to the fact that the rows of scales in the mid part of the body do not exceed 25 (M. indomitus = 23–25, M. mexicanus = 22–27, M. nummifer = 23–28, M. occiduus = 23–27, M. olmec = 22–26); with regard to M. mexicanus and M. olmec, M. borealis can be distinguished because the supraocular scales are never divided, whereas in the other two species they can be; the postorbital stripe is narrower with respect to those of M. mexicanus and M. nummifer, covers a lower number of temporal scales (M. borealis = 3–5, M. indomitus = 4, M. mexicanus = 1–7, M. nummifer = 4–8, M. occiduus = 5–6, M. olmec = 3–6); has a lower average number of interoculabial scales (M. borealis = 2–3, M. indomitus = 4–5, M. mexicanus = 2–5, M. nummifer = 2–5, M. occiduus = 4–5, M. olmec = 4–6), and a higher number of scales in contact with the supraoculars (M. borealis = 4–6, M. indomitus = 4–5, M. mexicanus = 3–5, M. nummifer = 3–5, M. occiduus = 4, M. olmec = 3–5). Metlapilcoatlus borealis has a completely dark pigmentation in the last third of the body after the cloacal scale, as opposed to other species, where this region is black with light spots. (Tepos-Ramírez et al. 2021).In addition to the differences in external morphology, the more distinctive traits are found in the hemipenial morphology, where M. borealis presents a strongly thickened sulcus spermaticus that turns ventro-diestrally to the apex of the lobes, while it is a thin structure that runs longitudinally along the center of the hemipenes sulcate side in the rest of the species of Metlapilcoatlus; the calyculate area in the interior region of the sulcate side of the hemipenis is laid out obliquely with respect to the spinous area, unlike in the rest of the species where the division of the spinous area and the calyculate area cuts transversally across the sulcate side of the hemipenis, forming a groove shaped like a ‘‘V’’. The exception to this is M. occiduus, where there is no division of the calyculate area, since this species does not appear to have spines in the hemipenes; M. borealis has the smallest hemipenis of the entire genus, even among similarly sized males (M. borealis HL = 13.21, HW = 2.21; M. indomitus HL = 27 mm, HW = 10.5 mm; M. mexicanus HL ‡ 20 mm, HW = 11. 25 mm; M. nummifer = HL ‡ 16 mm, HW = 9 mm; M. occiduus HL ‡ 20 mm, HW = 7.5 mm; M. olmec HL = 20 mm, HW = 10 mm). Metlapilcoatlus borealis can be distinguished from M. mexicanus–M. nummifer–M. olmec by its higher number of spines at the base of the lobes (M. borealis = 6, M. indomitus = 13, M. mexicanus = 4, M. nummifer = 3, M. occiduus = 0, M. olmec = 3) and a higher number of rows of calyces in the lobes (M. borealis = 6, M. indomitus = 13, M. mexicanus = 4, M. nummifer = 3, M. occiduus = 0, M. olmec = 3) (Tepos-Ramírez et al. 2021).Color in life: Collected specimens of M. borealis presented a base coloration ranging from orange to dark brown. Dorsal and lateral blocks always darker than the base color, and sometimes the fringes of the blocks had darker colorations. Ventral coloration went from light yellow and white hues to yellow and orange in the gular region (Tepos-Ramírez et al. 2021).
Gloydius swild	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Gloydius swild sp. nov. differs from other congeneric species in the following characteristics: i) the narrower postorbital stripe, ii) a pair of round spots on the parietal scales; iii) the absence of the black spots on the lateral body; iv) 21 rows of mid-body dorsal scales; v) a pair of arched stripes on the occiput; vi) 168–170 ventral scales, and vii) 43–46 subcaudal scales. (Shi et al. 2021).Comparisons: Morphologically, Gloydius swild sp. nov. is quite similar to G. angusticeps, but differs by the narrower, straight bordered brown postorbital stripe (versus wider postorbital stripe with dentate lower border in G. angusticeps). G. swild sp. nov. differs from G. strauchi, G. huangi, and G. rubromaculatus by the narrow triangular head from dorsal view (versus spoon-shaped head in above-mentioned species), from G. monticola by having seven supralabials (versus always six supralabials) and more subcaudal scales (43–46 pairs versus always fewer than 30 pairs of subcaudal scales), from G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis by its dark greyish brown background dorsal color (versus yellowish-brown body color) and lacking a lateral white line on each side (versus possessing a lateral white line on each side), from G. himalayanus by possessing an indistinct canthus rostralis (versus very distinct canthus rostralis; Gloyd and Conant 1990). (Shi et al. 2021).Color in life: Gloydius swild sp. nov., eye light greyish brown on the upper half while black on the bottom half, pupil black, vertical with light yellow margins; postorbital stripe relatively narrow, only half the width of the anterior temporals, greyish brown and white bordered on the lower edge, extending from the posterior orbit to the lateral surface of the neck; supralabials and infralabials greyish white, scattered with large irregularly sized, black blotches, rendering the lateral head granitoid. One black Ω-shaped mark on the anterodorsal head, covering the posteromedial part of prefrontals, the anterior and lateral part of the frontals and the anterior part of the parietals. The infralabials are bordered with yellow on the lower edge.The body coloration is dark blueish-grey, with two rows of irregular black X-shaped or C-shaped crossbands on the mid-body, each covering about 10 dorsal scales (or more), separated by a gap of one or two dorsal scales vertically, sometimes in contact with the adjacent ones forming zigzag stripes, but hardly merged on the medial dorsal line, extending laterally to one or two dorsal scales from the ventrals. Ventral scales light grey, scattered with dense irregular black blotches, rendering the ventral scales granitoid. The tip of tail is bony, similar to the main body in coloration on both ventral and dorsal sides (Figs 1C, D, 3D–F). Despite the inconspicuous variation in the coloration among the type series of G. swild sp. nov., the scalations vary considerably between the two specimens. The range of the temporal scales of the holotype (IVPP OV 2725) is 3+5 on the left side but 2+4 on the right side, while in the paratype (IVPP OV 2726), the temporal scales are displayed as 2+4 on both sides. Ventrals range from 168–170 in females (n = 2), while range from 43–46 in females (n = 3, including one shed skin from the wild). Total length ranges from 529.5–629.1 in adult females. The infralabials of the paratype lack the greyish-yellow margins seen in the holotype. (Shi et al. 2021).
Bothrops germanoi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrops germanoi sp. nov. is diagnosed and distinguished from other representatives of the B. jararaca species group by a combination of characters: (1) SVL in adults 512-632 mm; (2) 196-204 ventrals in females, and 190-202 in males; (3) 51-60 subcaudals in females, and 58-66 in males; (4) three anterior intercanthals; (5) two preoculars, with the bottom scale fusioned with upper postlacunal; (6) two postoculars; (7) lacuno-labial present (prelacunal fusioned with the second supralabial); (8) third supralabial usually in contact with the subocular; (9) 22-23 interrictals; (10) 9-10 infralabials; (11) 7-9 subinfralabials in females, and 4-7 in males; (12) symphyseal scale elongated, separating the first pairs of infralabials; (13) usually five gulars; (14) 1-3 interoculabials; (15) 1-3 prefoveals; (16) 0-2 post foveals; (17) a remarkable small creamish spot above the head; (18) postocular stripe bordered in white; (19) 22-25 dorsals in anterior portion of body; (20) 21-24 dorsals at midbody; (21) 15-19 dorsals posteriorly; and (22) lateral blotches trapezoidal anteriorly, triangular posteriorly, and totally filled in brown. From the mainland population of B. jararaca, males and females of the new species can be mainly distinguished by the smaller SVL, relatively larger head, lower number of ventrals, and a relatively longer tail in males (Tables S11, S12). When compared with other island species, the new species is easily distinguished from B. alcatraz, B. insularis and B. otavioi by several morphologic traits (Tables Sll, S12), but mainly by a smaller head, a greater number of ventrals, and by a greater number of subcaudals in males (see detailed comparison below). (BARBO et al. 2022)Comparisons with closest species: B. germanoi sp. nov. is distinguished from the mainland populations of B. jararaca by its smaller SVL in adult males (H=19.561, p<0.001) and females (H=18.003, p < 0.001); a slender body; a longer RHL in males (H = 18.242, p < 0.00 l) and females (H = 14.56, p<0.001); a longer RTL in males (H=7.383, p = 0.006); fewer ventral scales in males (H = 12.029, p < 0.001) and females (H = 13.236, p < 0.001); fewer New lancehead snake of the genus Bothrops 11 anterior (H=15.285, p<0.001), p < 0.001), and posterior rows p < 0.001); and fewer interrictals p < 0.001) (Tables S11, S12). median (19.806, of dorsals (23.33, scales (H = 30.96, The new species is distinguished from B. alcatraz by a longer SVL in adult males (H = 13.212, p < 0.001) and females (H=9.069, p=0.0026); a smaller RHL in males (H= 13.027, p<0.001), and females (H=9.949, p = 0.001); a longer RTL in males (t= 2.187, p =0.051) and females (t = 2.69, p = 0.02); more ventrals in males (H=l5.049, p<0.001) and females (H=13.168, p < 0.001); more subcaudals in males (H= 13.137, p<0.001) and females (H=9.523, p=0.002); fewer anterior (H=ll.705, p<0.001), median (17.278, p < 0.001), and posterior dorsals (23.33, p < 0.001); and fewer interrictal scales (H = 16.29, p < 0.001). From B. insularis, the new species is distinguished by a smaller SVL in adults males (t = -2.306, p = 0.047) and females (H = 15.077, p < 0.001); a smaller RHL in males (t = -4.608, p=0.001) and females (H=9.296, p = 0.0023); a longer RTL in females (t = -2.941, p = 0.029); more ventral scales in males (H = 26.01, p < 0.00 l) and females (H = 18.973, p < 0.00 I); more subcaudals in males (H = 10.358, p = 0.001); fewer anterior (H=l7.107, p<0.001), median (17.143, p < 0.001), and posterior rows p < 0.001); and fewer of dorsals interrictal (24.927, scales (H = 28.18, p < 0.001). From B. otavioi, the new species is distinguished by the longer SVL in males (H= 10.5, p=0.001), and females (H = 3.922, p = 0.047); smaller RHL in males (H=l0.633, p=0.001) and females (H=4.789, p = 0.002); more ventral scales in males (H = 17.238, p < 0.001), and females (H = 13.495, p < 0.001) ; more subcaudals in males (H=12.024, p<0.001) and in females (H=5.672, p=0.01); fewer median (H=20.212, p<0.001) and posterior rows of dorsals (H = 32.733, p < 0.001); and fewer interrictal scales (H= 12.41,p<0.001). The new species is also distinguished from B. sazimai by a smaller SVL in adults females (t = -2.368, p = 0.039); a longer RHL in males (H = 7.087, p = 0.007) and females (H = 12.694, p < 0.001); fewer ventral scales in males (t = -2.502, p = 0.024) and females (t = -4.169, p < 0.001); fewer subcaudals in males (H = 9.94, p = 0.001); more anterior dorsals (t=3.76, p<0.001); fewer posterior rows of dorsals (t = -2.78, p=0.01); and fewer interrictal scales (H = 18.91, p < 0.001). (BARBO et al. 2022)Coloration in life: greyish on the dorsal surface, with 16-18 brownish lateral markings irregularly defined, trapezoidal (anteriorly) and triangular (posteriorly), filled in brown, with well-defined dark brown borders opposite and alternate to each other in middle of dorsum. Dorsum of head was pale brown, with two well-defined dark lines on occipital region and neck; well-defined brownish and dark brown, white-contoured postocular stripes, extending from behind eye and covering superior portion of 6th , 7th and 8th supralabials, up to three scales long behind rictual region; gular region mostly whitish-creamish, with infralabials and symphysial lightly stained in grey; venter creamish and immaculate on the ten first ventrals, becoming heavily pigmented afterwards; tail grayish dorsally, covered with irregular small dark brown blotches anteriorly, and uniformly brown posteriorly, with a conspicuous yellowish tail tip; subcaudals heavily pigmented up to the 46th subcaudals, where yellowish tail tip begins. (BARBO et al. 2022)Variation: Based on the type series of the new species the subinfralabials (right side) in males varies between four (n= 1), five (n= 1), six (n= 3), and seven (n= 5), and in females with seven (n = 2), eight (n = 1), and nine (n = 4). Interoculabials vary between one (n = 5), two (n = 7), and three (n = 5) scales. Scales above 3rd and 4th supralabials vary between zero (n = 4), and one (n = 13). Sexual dimorphism: males have longer RTL (H=8.185, p=0.004), and more subcaudals (t=3.27, p = 0.01) than females. Females have longer RHL (H = 9.076, p = 0.002), and have more infralabial scales than males (7-9 vs. 4-7). (BARBO et al. 2022)
Bothrops jabrensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	DIAGNOSIS: Bothrops jabrensis sp. nov. is distinguished from other species of the B. jararaca group by the following combination of characters: (1) smaller adult size; (2) dorsum predominantly grayish and (or) brownish; (3) venter whitish or light grayish; (4) postorbital stripes brownish and narrow, with a thin white border; (5) 8 supralabials; (6) 11 infralabials; (7) 2 postoculars; (8) 4–6 prefoveals; (9) 1–2 postfoveals; (10) lacunolabial absent; (11) 4–5 interoculabials; (12) 7 temporals; (13) 5–8 intersupraoculars; (14) 23–25 interrictals; (15) 4–5 gulars; (16) 16–18 lateral blotches of body; (17) 21– 22 anterior dorsals in females, 21 in male; (18) 21–23 midbody dorsals in females, 21 in male; (19) 17–19 posterior dorsals in females, 17 in male; (20) 177–182 ventrals in females, 176 in male; (21) 49–51 subcaudals in females, 53 in male; (22) single anal plate. (BARBO et al. 2022)COMPARISONS: A summary of some meristic and morphometric characters is presented in Table 1. When compared with representatives of the B. jararaca species group, B. jabrensis sp. nov. presents a lower number of ventrals (176 in males; 177–182 in females), and it is distinguished from the B. jararaca from NC (184–219 in males; 188–220 in females), B. jararaca from SC (182– 202 in males; 188–208 in females), B. otavioi (182–191 in males; 185–194 in females), and B. sazimai (195–206 in males; 198–214 in females). The new species has also lower numbers of anterior dorsals and dorsals at midbody (21–22 and 21–23 scales, respectively), and it is distinguished from B. jararaca of SC (22–27 and 22–26), B. alcatraz (23–28 and 23–26), B. insularis (23–28 and 22–27), and B. otavioi (23–25 and 23–26). Additionally, the new species differs by the lower numbers of subcaudals (53 in males; 49–51 in females) from B. sazimai (63–69 in males; 54–65 in females), and by the grayish and brownish coloration from B. insularis (pale or yellowish coloration).The new species is easily distinguished from species included in the B. neuwiedi group (for a detailed description of the B. neuwiedi group see Silva and Rodrigues 2008) by the invariable grayish ground color of the body (versus a polychromatic and extremely variable background color in the B. neuwiedi species group). Additionally, the dorsum of the head in B. jabrensis sp. nov. presents irregular and undefined markings (versus well-defined markings in the B. neuwiedi group), the supralabials and gulars display distinct and spotless light gray coloration (versus dark or strongly pigmented in most species of the B. neuwiedi group), the ground color of the venter is whitish and speckless (versus creamish and speckled in black in the B. neuwiedi group), and the lateral blotches of the body are similar to an inverted “V”, identical of those found in species included in the B. jararaca group (versus lateral blotches mostly trapezoidal or presenting a horseshoe pattern in the B. neuwiedi group).Bothrops jabrensis sp. nov. is possibly sympatric with Bothrops erythromelas Amaral, 1923 and Bothrops lutzi (Miranda-Ribeiro, 1915) (see the Discussion), although it can be easily distinguished from B. erythromelas by the higher number of dorsal scales at midbody (21–23 versus 19–21 in B. erythromelas) and the higher numbers of ventrals (176–182 versus 139–158) and subcaudals (49–53 versus 32–42). From B. lutzi, the new species differs by the absence of white blotches in the supralabials, higher number of ventrals (176 versus 161–173 in males; 177–182 versus 159–179 in females), and higher number of subcaudals (53 versus 40–50 in males; 49–51 versus 34–46 in females). (BARBO et al. 2022)COLOR IN LIFE: The color in life was grayish/brownish on dorsal surface with 16/17 lateral triangular/trapezoidal markings (saddles) that are irregularly defined, dark or brown–gray with well-defined borders, weakly light-grayish edged, opposite and alternate to each other in the middle of dorsum; dorsum of head grayish, with irregular and undefined dark-brown markings (Figs. 4A–4C); postorbital stripe is dark brown, bordered below by a very thin light line. The postorbital stripe extends from behind the eye, covering superior portion of 7th and 8th supralabials, up to four scales long behind rictus oris, downwards to ventral direction; gular region mostly whitish–creamish, with infralabials and symphysial finely speckled in gray; venter mostly whitish, covering cloacal plate; tail grayish dorsally, covered with small dark gray lateral blotches, with subcaudals mostly whitish in ventral plan. (BARBO et al. 2022)
Trimeresurus mayaae	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by (1) hemipenes short and strongly spinose; (2) body green in both males and females; (3) interstitial skin black; (4) moderate size, with maximum total length of 750mm; (5) conspicuous bicolored postocular stripe in males, thin and white below, wide and bright red above, faint white or no postocular stripe present in female (6) vivid, wide bicolored ventrolateral stripe, deep red below/white above in males, extending along the lower half of the tail, white in females; (7) eyes rust coloured in males, green in females; (8) tail mostly rusty or reddish-brown (9) V: 157–162; SC: 54–67 in males and V: 153; SC: 54–55 in females; (10) first supralabial distinct from nasal; (11) 19 or 21 dorsal scale rows at midbody, moderately keeled; (12) snout covered with rather enlarged juxtaposed scales; (13) internasals never in contact, separated by 1–2 scale; (14) supraoculars narrower than internasals, separated by 9–10 smooth cephalic scales. (RATHEE et al. 2022)Comparisons: Based on the molecular data and hemipenis structure, Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. is found to be a member of subgenera Viridovipera. The species differs from all the known members of Viridovipera by following characters:Morphologically and meristically Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. closely resembles T. gumprechti, but differs from the latter by having rust coloured or greenish eye in males versus bright or deep red in T. gumprechti and green coloured eye in female versus golden yellow in T. gumprechti. Furthermore, Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. has 1–2 scales between internasal versus 0–1 in T. gumprechti.; ventral scales range 153–162 in Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. versus 162–168 T. gumprechti; subcaudals 54–69 in Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. versus 51–71 in T. gumprechti; TaL/TL in females 0.17 in Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. versus 0.14–0.16 in T. gumprechti. Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. differs from all the other members of subgenera Viridovipera by having rust coloured eye in males versus bright red or amber (rarely yellow) coloured in T. stejnegeri Schmidt, yellow or yellowish green in T. vogeli David, Vidal & Pauwels, green or yellowish green in T. medoensis Zhao, and bright or deep red in T. yunnanensis, and a green coloured eye in females versus yellow or amber in T. stejnegeri, yellow in T. vogeli and golden yellow in T. yunnanensis. A bicoloured (broad red above and thin white below) postocular streak is present in males of Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. versus white in T. stejnegeri, white, thin and faint in T. vogeli, no postocular streak in T. yunnanensis. A white ventrolateral stripe is present in female Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. versus red + white in T. medoensis and pale green in T. yunnanensis. Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. has 19–21 dorsal scale rows at the midbody versus 17 in T. medoensis and 19 in T. yunnanensis. Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. with 3–4 palatine teeth versus 5 in T. yunnanensis; Trimeresurus mayaae sp. nov. with 10 pterygoid teeth versus 12–14 in T. yunnanensis & T. stejnegeri. The new species differs from members of Viridovipera in showing a pairwise sequence divergence (p-distance) of 5–10% for cytochrome b gene (RATHEE et al. 2022)
Gloydius lateralis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis (and/or description): The above-mentioned specimens were identified as members of the genus Gloydius based on the small body size, bilateral pits, and divided subcaudal scales. G. lateralis sp. nov. differs from other congeneric species by a combination of the following characteristics: (1) relatively larger eyes (ED/HL: 0.145–0.171, n = 5); (2) three palatine teeth; (3) 20 or 21 rows of midbody dorsal scales; (4) ventrals 151–163 (n = 9); (5) subcaudals 38–49 (n = 6); (6) dorsal body laurel green or light brown with four rows of zigzag, dark brown patches, the medial two rows separated from each other by alternate phyllotaxis pattern in background color; (7) continuous, regular greyish-brown ventrolateral stripe on each side of body and tail. (Zhang et al. 2022)Comparisons: Compared to other species in the genus Gloydius, G. lateralis sp. nov. has continuous, regular greyish-brown and pale, greyish-white ventrolateral stripes on both sides (vs disconnected white upper bordered ventrolateral stripes in G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis; lacking the ventrolateral stripes in other congeneric species), and relatively larger eyes than the congeneric species (the ratio between the eye diameter and head length ranges from 0.145–0.171 in G. lateralis sp. nov. vs < 0.134 in others). Gloydius lateralis sp. nov. can be differentiated from the species in the G. blomhoffii group by having three palatine teeth (vs four), from the G. halys complex by having 20 or 21 rows of midbody dorsal scales (vs 22 or 23).For species in the G. strauchi group, Gloydius lateralis sp. nov. can be differentiated from G. monticola by having 20 or 21 rows of mid-body dorsal scales (vs 19 in G. monticola). Given the similar to G. angusticeps, G. lateralis sp. nov. can be differentiated from the latter by the larger eyes (ED/HL 0.145–0.171 vs 0.104–0.119) and the ticker postorbital stripes. Additionally, the ventrolateral stripes sometimes appear in some other Gloydius species, such as G. qinlingensis and G. liupanensis, but G. lateralis sp. nov. differs from them by having the ventrolateral stripe lacking a white upper edge. Gloydius lateralis sp. nov. differs from G. strauchi, G. rubromaculatus, G. lipipengi, and G. huangi by the triangular head in dorsal view (vs spoon-shaped head).Gloydius swild is another species from Heishui, Aba, Sichuan (female holotype IVPP OV 2725 and paratype IVPP OV 2726) that is phylogenetically most closely related to G. lateralis sp. nov., but G. swild can be separated from the latter by significant branch lengths and p-distance (6.1%). G. lateralis sp. nov. differs from G. swild by having fewer ventrals 151–163 (n = 9) (vs 168–170, n = 2), laurel-green dorsal body with deep colored patches (vs dark, greyish-brown background dorsal color), relatively larger eyes (ED/HL 14.5–17.1%, n = 5 vs 11.5–13.4%, n = 2), the thicker postorbital stripes (2/3 the width of the anterior temporal vs half the width of the anterior temporal), and the regular greyish-brown ventrolateral stripes (vs irregular ventrolateral stripes). (Zhang et al. 2022)Color in life: Description based on observation immediately after shedding. Dorsal head gray with distinct smoky-black markings resembling a human in half squat; one gray patch present on middle of frontal; one gray U-shaped marking present on parietals. Lateral head light gray; postorbital stripe otter brown, wider than half of the largest anterior temporal, extending to lateral neck, without white margins; supralabials and infralabials light gray without conspicuous spots; iris bicolored, upper one-third gold, lower part marbled with smoky black; edges of pupil gold. Ventral head white; one faint yellow-orange stripe present on inner edges of infralabials and adjacent edges of contacting scales on both lateral sides of the lower lip. Tone uniformly purple-taupe.Dorsal body laurel green; two rows of pine-needle colored irregular patches present on dorsolateral body behind head markings, each patch involving several scales (mostly 4–8) on seventh to higher dorsal scale rows, and partially connected or separated by one laurel-green scale; vertebral scales mostly laurel green, forming an alternate phyllotaxis pattern on the body after neck; a row of copper patches present on both sides of lateral body behind postorbital stripe, involving several scales (5–7) on dorsal scale rows 3–6, also partially connected or separated by one laurel-green scale. Ventral body white right behind head, mottled with sparse smoky-black spots, gradually dense to posterior; a distinct, continuous, regular, greyish-brown ventrolateral stripe present on each side of body, behind faint yellow-orange stripe, lie on junction of ventrals and lower edge of first dorsal scales. Dorsal tail smoky black, covered with a dozen of small, laurel-green patches or transverse bands. Ventral tail laurel green with dense, smoky-black spots, continuous, regular, greyish brown, extending from body to middle of ventrolateral tail. Skin between all dorsal scales black. Front edge of most dorsal scales dyed black. (Zhang et al. 2022)
Bothrocophias tulitoi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrocophias tulitoi sp. nov. can be distinguished from all its congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) 150–172 ventral scales in females, 153–162 ventral scales in males; (2) internasal scales in contact or separated by a single small scale; (3) absence of canthorostral scales; (4) absence of lacunolabial scale; (5) one prelacunal scale; (6) hemipenial lobes subconical and ornamented toward the apex by large and dense calyces with spinulate edges; (7) bifurcation point of hemipenial lobes about 3–6 sudcaudal scales; (8) hemipenial body ornamented by numerous dense, large, and strongly calcified mesial spines arranged in oblique lines; (9) in sulcate view, lateral and mesial spines of the hemipenial body homogeneous in size; (10) body surface with less than 28 dark-brown bands dorsally and/or juxtaposed trapezoid-shaped blotches with paler centers; and (11) ventral surface of the tail uniformly bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots without a regular pattern (Figs 3, 4). (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Comparisons. Bothrocophias tulitoi sp. nov. can be distinguished from all Bothrocophias species by having a creamy white or pale yellow ventral ground color with ventral scales heavily marked with black pigment towards the edges contacting the paraventral scales, and the presence of spots without a regular pattern on the mesial surface turning heavily mottled with dark brown pigment toward the tail (versus homogeneously dark brown to black in B. campbelli; mottled heavily with dark brown pigment, with the pale interspaces between the ventrolateral blotches encroaching on the lateral edges of ventral scales in B. colombianus; greyish brown medially, becoming paler laterally, with or without alternating dark brown spots in B. hyoprora; yellow mottled with pale to dark brown, darker posteriorly in B. lojanus; and pale pink to almost white in B. myersi); ventral surface of the tail with bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots without a regular pattern, and heavily marked with dark pigment towards the base (versus proximally dark brown and distally yellow or yellow-green in B. andianus; bright yellow to tan with diffuse grayish or brown pigment in B. campbelli; cream or pale yellow with a sparse peppering of brown in B. colombianus; and whitish with a moderate suffusion of grey in B. myersi). Comparisons of meristic and hemipenial characters with all its congeners of toadheaded pitvipers are summarized in Table 4. Additionally, Bothrocophias tulitoi sp. nov. can be distinguished from Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian populations of toadheaded pitvipers currently classified as B. microphthalmus by having ventral surface of tail with bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots without a regular pattern and heavily marked towards the base (versus heavily marked with black or dark brown pigment proximally, mottled medially with pale to dark brown, and pale diffuse mottling or pale with interspaces mottled distally in Bolivian and Peruvian populations). Comparisons of meristic and hemipenial characters with the Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian populations of toadheaded pitvipers currently classified as B. microphthalmus are summarized in Table 5. Specimens, taxonomic descriptions, and pictures of snakes classified as B. microphthalmus from the Amazonian slopes of Brazil (Rondônia state) were not available for this study. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Color of the holotype in life. Ground color of the dorsal surface of the head is pale brown to brown with diffuse marks dark-brown or grey without a distinctive pattern. Ground color of the lateral surfaces of the head is scattered grey-brown from the snout to anterior edge of the eye; a conspicuous dark-brown postocular stripe running obliquely from the posterior edge of the eye to the angle formed by the quadrate and jaw bone joint encompasses the temporal scales, the last two supralabial scales, the last infralabial scale, and the mesial scales located between the preventral and infralabial scales; conspicuous tricolored ocelli in the third to fifth supralabial scales and third to seventh infralabial scales with center white or white-cream, followed by an internal edge darkbrown or black, and external broad circle or edge yellow or yellow-reddish. Ventral surfaces of the head are dark orange-gold and peppered with brown with conspicuous tricolored ocelli as described above in the first, third to seventh infralabial scales and first pair of gular scales. Ground color of the dorsal body surfaces is yellow-tan to brown mottling with dark brown-reddish pigment and weak orange speckles; 27 dark-brown bands and/or opposite or juxtaposed trapezoid-shaped blotches with pale center ornamented with or without brown spots. Ground color of body ventral surfaces is creamy white or yellow with ventral scales heavily marked with black pigment towards the edges contacting paraventral scales and spotted without a regular pattern on the mesial surface turning heavily mottled with dark brown pigment toward the tail; edges of the spots of the mesial surfaces yellow reddish turning dark brown toward the tail. Dorsal surfaces of the tail covered by nine broad dark brown bands separated by four narrow pale bands that fuse toward the distal end of the tail; tail ventral surface with bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots without a regular pattern, and heavily marked with dark pigment towards the base. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Color pattern variation. (Fig. 4) Adults of Bothrocophias tulitoi sp. nov. exhibit sexual dimorphism. The dorsal, lateral, and ventral surfaces of the head and body of males are melanized with conspicuously tricolored ocelli in the third to fifth supralabial scales, third to seventh infralabial scales, and first pair of gular scales, and the lateral and ventral surfaces of the head in females exhibit a homogenous creamish yellow coloration without ocelli in the labial or gular scales; some specimens exhibit weakly visible ocelli (e.g., INSZ148). Neonates and juveniles of both sexes can possess ocelli in some labials or gular scales, but only males retain them until adulthood. In addition, in neonates and juveniles, the dorsal body ground color is pale yellow, and the dorsal bands are conspicuous throughout the body (Fig. 4A); in adults of both sexes, the dorsal ground color is yellow or tan to brown; the bands are inconspicuous in the first third of the body and become more conspicuous towards the medial and posterior body sections. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Meristic variation. (Table 4) Female and male adults of Bothrocophias tulitoi sp. nov. exhibit sexual dimorphism in ventral scale counts (Table 4). The specimen IAVH 6396, exhibits an unusually low ventral scale count (150), which is an outlier among females in our sample. In four specimens (INSZ 134, 144–46), the supralacunal scale is fused with the third preocular scale and enters the eye orbit. On INSZ 073, the canthal scale separates the first preocular and loreal scale; in two specimens (MLS 1634, IAvH-R7795), infralabial counts are 10–11 scales; and in INSZ 130, the asymmetrical presence of a single and small canthorostral scale on one side of the head was observed. High counts of interoculolabial scales (range 9–12) were recorded in three neonates born in captivity (INSZ 128, 130, 136). (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)
Bothrocophias myrringae	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Bothrocophias myrringae sp. nov. can be distinguished from all its congeners by the following combination of characters: (1) 157–161 ventral scales in females, 152–155 ventral scales in males; (2) internasal scales in contact or separated by a single small scale (3) absence of canthorostral scales; (4) lacunolabial scale usually present; (5) hemipenial lobes slim and cylindrical, moderately capitate distally, weakly ornamented toward the apex with large and scarce calyces with weakly spinulate edges; (8) bifurcation point of the hemipenial lobes about 2–4 sudcaudal scales; (9) hemipenial body ornamented by numerous mesial spines that increase in size from the center to periphery of the hemipenial body and arranged in oblique lines; (10) in sulcate view, lateral and mesial spines of the hemipenial body variable in size; (11) sulcus spermaticus walls weakly defined; (12) usually more than 28 dark-brown bands and/or opposite or juxtaposed trapezoid-shaped blotches with paler centers dorsally; and (13) ventral surfaces of the tail with bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots without a regular pattern and heavily marked with dark pigment towards the base (Fig. 7). (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Comparisons. Bothrocophias myrringae sp. nov. can be distinguished from all its congeners by its creamy yellow ventral surfaces and ventral scales mottled with dark brown pigment, becoming creamy white toward the edges in contact with the paraventral scales, forming a white-cream paraventral stripe which proximally fuses with the final edges of the postocular stripe, and distally is interrupted by dark spots without a regular pattern; mesial ventral surfaces become heavily mottled with dark brown pigment toward the tail (versus homogeneously dark brown to black in B. campbelli; heavily mottled with dark brown pigment, with the pale interspaces between the ventrolateral blotches encroaching on the lateral edges of the ventral scales in B. colombianus; greyish brown medially, becoming paler laterally, with or without alternating dark brown spots in B. hyoprora; yellow mottled with pale to dark brown, darker posteriorly in B. lojanus; pale pink to almost white in B. myersi); ventral tail surface bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots in an irregular pattern, and the base of tail heavily marked with dark pigment (versus base of tail dark brown and distally yellow or yellow-green in B. andianus; bright yellow to tan with diffuse grayish or brown pigment in B. campbelli; cream or pale yellow with a sparse peppering of brown in B. colombianus; whitish with a moderate suffusion of grey in B. myersi. Comparisons of meristic and hemipenial characters with all its congeners of toadheaded pitvipers are summarized in Table 4.Bothrocophias myrringae sp. nov. can be distinguished from Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian populations of toadheaded pitvipers currently classified as B. microphthalmus by ventral surface of tail with uniformly bright reddish or orange-reddish speckles with black spots without a regular pattern (versus heavily marked proximally with black or dark brown pigment, medially mottled with pale to dark brown, and distally with pale diffuse or pale mottling with interspaces in Bolivian and Peruvian populations). Comparisons of meristic and hemipenial characters with the Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian populations of toadheaded pitvipers the complex are summarized in Table 5. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Description of holotype. (Figs 5–7, Table 3) Male, small (SVL = 542 mm, TL = 95 mm, ratio 17.5%), head and body strongly differentiated by nuchal constriction; head longer than wide (HW/HL 53.3%); snout prognathous and not upturned; absence of nasorostral and canthorostral scales; two internasal scales in contact; rostral visible from dorsal view and in narrow contact with internasal scales; two canthal scales in broad contact with internasals, the first preocular, and loreal scales in lateral view; three intercanthal scales; two supraocular scales wider than long (SW/SL= 66.4%); seven intersupraocular scales; 26 interrictal scales; two nasal scales: anterior nasal scale in broad contact with rostral, internasal, and first supralabial scale, and posterior nasal scale in contact with loreal, two prefoveal, and subnasal scales; a single subnasal scale; two prefoveal scales on both sides of the head; a single lacunolabial scale in broad contact with the first and second supralabial scales as well as with prefoveal and loreal scales, and in narrow contact with supralacunal scale; a single supralacunal scale in broad contact with first preocular scale and in narrow contact with second preocular and loreal scales; a single sublacunal in broad contact with second supralabial, and in narrow contact with third preocular, lacunolabial, and single posfoveal scale; a single subocular scale; a single posfoveal scale; five interoculolabial scales; two postocular scales; six supralabial scales, second supralabial slightly higher and wider than fourth to seventh supralabial scales, and notably higher and wider than first supralabial scale; eight infralabial scales, first infralabial scales separated by mental scale and in broad contact with first pair of gular scales, second and third infralabial scales in contact with first pair of gular scales; three pairs of gular scales; four preventral scales; dorsal scale rows 21–23–19; 155 ventral scales; anal scale single; 54 subcaudal scales; slender tail not prehensile. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Color of the holotype in life. (Fig. 8A–B) The dorsal surface of the head has a dark to reddish-brown ground color with diffuse dark brown marks without a distinctive pattern. The lateral surface of the head is scattered pale yellow from the snout to anterior edge of the eye; a conspicuous dark-brown postocular stripe with white edges running obliquely from the posterior edge of the eye to the angle formed by the quadrate and jaw bone joint encompasses the temporal scales, the last two supralabial scales, the last infralabial scale, and the mesial scales located between the preventral and infralabial scales; conspicuous tricolored ocelli present on fourth to sixth infralabial scales with white or white-cream centers, followed by dark-brown or black edge, and an external broader edge yellow or reddish-yellow. Ventral surfaces of the head are tan with a peppering of brown and dark yellow without ocelli. Ground color of the dorsal body surfaces is pale yellow, tan to brown mottled with dark brown-reddish pigment and weak orange speckles; 34 dark-brown dorsal bands and/or opposite or juxtaposed trapezoid-shaped blotches with pale centre ornamented with or without brown spots. Ventral scales are creamish yellow with ventral scales heavily marked, with brown-reddish and dark yellow pigment towards the edges in contact with the paraventral scales and spotted without a regular pattern on the mesial surface with a conspicuous white-cream paraventral stripe which proximally fuses with the final edges of the postocular stripe, and distally is interrupted by dark spots without a regular pattern. Dorsal surfaces of the tail covered by two broad dark brown bands separated by three narrow pale bands that fuse toward the distal end of the tail; ventral tail surface bright reddish or orange-reddish, darkening heavily towards the base, speckled with black spots in an irregular. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Color pattern variation. (Fig. 8C–D) Adults of Bothrocophias myrringae sp. nov. exhibit sexual dimorphism. The dorsal, lateral, and ventral surfaces of the head and body of males are melanized with conspicuous tricolored ocelli on the third to seventh infralabial scales, and the lateral and ventral surfaces of the head in females exhibit a homogenous creamish yellow to pale yellow coloration without ocelli in the labials and gular scales (Fig. 8C–D). In addition, eye color in males is usually homogeneously mottled with dark brown pigment and weak orange speckles around the pupil; in females, it is orange-gold with a peppering of brown. One female (IAvH-R7045: San Juanito, Meta) has 25 dorsal bands, which was an unusual count among our samples. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)Meristic variation. (Table 4) Female and male adults of Bothrocophias myrringae sp. nov. exhibit sexual dimorphism in ventral scale counts (Table 4). One female (IAvH-R6877: Guayabetal, Cundinamarca) has a single canthorostral scale on the right side of the head. One male (INSVSR-00099: El Calvario, Meta) lacks a lacunolabial scale on both sides of the head, and this is the only specimen showing this condition. (Angarita-Sierra et al. 2022)
Trimeresurus calamitas	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A large species of pitviper of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by the combination of (1) body elongate, head long and massive in adults; (2) dorsal surfaces deep or dark green, or dark bluish-green, with dorsal scales largely edged with black but non forming a pattern of crossbands; (3) 21 DSR at midbody; (4) 1st supralabial totally separated from nasal scale; (5) large internasals, always in contact; (6) usually 2 supralabials, 3rd–4th SL in contact with subocular (rarely 1st or 3rd SL only); (7) supraoculars large but elongate, separated by 5– 7 cephalic scales; (8) tail long, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.189 and 0.208 in males and 0.143 and 0.166 in females; (9) 174–192 VEN; (10) 61–77 SC (males: 75–77; females: 61–71); (11) eye colour greenish-gold in preservative (unknown in life); (12) cephalic scales strongly and broadly edged with black but not forming streaks; (13) no postocular streak; (15) no ventrolateral stripe or, rarely, a poorly defined stripe due to a cream or pale greenish-yellow spot on each scale of the 1st DSR; (16) tail dark green as the body, with scales edged with black, marked with several, large rusty brown or reddish-brown blotches (pinkish-salmon in preservative), narrowly separated with dark green, becoming fused on the last quarter of the tail, which is entirely of the same colour as the blotches; and (17) venter pale yellowish green or pale bluish green; each ventral narrowly edged with black, especially on their central part, sometimes on the whole of their posterior margin.  (Vogel et al. 2022)Comparisons: Main characters separating Trimeresurus calamitas sp. nov. from other taxa of the groups of T. sumatranus and T. hageni are summarized in Table 1. Trimeresurus calamitas sp. nov. mainly differs from T. sumatranus by (1) a higher number of subcaudals in males (75– 77, = 75.9 vs. 66–72, = 68.8; z = -3.6, P <0.005); (2) a higher value of the ratio TaL/TL in males (0.189–0.212, x̅ = 0.201 vs. 0.144– 0.169, x̅ = 0.160); (3) the internasals always in contact vs. usually separate; (4) usually 4 supralabials touching the subocular (x̅ = 3.93) vs. 5–7 (x̅ = 5.95); (5) a white lateral line usually absent in females (in 18 out of 22) vs. present; (6) bands on body absent vs. present. T. calamitas sp. nov. differs from T. gunaleni by (1) a higher number of ventrals in males 174–187 (x̅ = 180.7) vs. 162–179 (x̅ = 168.4); (2) a higher number of ventrals in females 185–192 (x̅ = 188.5) vs. 164–174 ( = 169.5); (3) the number of subcaudals in males 75–77 (x̅ = 75.9) vs. 71–72 (x̅ = 71.5); (4) the internasals always in contact vs. always separate; (5) usually 4 supralabials touching the subocular (x̅ = 3.9) vs. usually 6, rarely 7 (x̅ = 6.1). T. calamitas sp. nov. differs from T. hageni by (1) the number of supralabials, 9–10 (x̅ = 9.4) vs. 10–11 (x̅ = 10.55); (2) the number of infralabials 10–12 (x̅ = 11.0) vs. usually 12–14 (x̅ = 13.1); (3) supralabials and cephalic scales strongly and broadly edged with black vs. no black borders; (4) a missing pale temporal streak vs. temporal streak usually present; (5) a pale ventrolateral stripe usually absent in females (in 18 out of 22) vs. present; (6) the absence of alternating dorsolateral blotches vs. large blotches usually present (in 28 out of 30 males and 30 out of 42 females); (7) each ventral pale and narrowly edged with black vs. green without black edges; and (8) in the number of cephalic scales 5–7 (x̅ = 5.7) vs. 6–8 (x̅ = 6.8). T. calamitas sp. nov. differs from T. whitteni sp. nov. by (1) the number of supralabials 9–10 (x̅ = 9.4) vs. 10–11 (x̅ = 10.4); (2) in the number of cephalic scales 5–7 (x̅ = 5.7) vs. 8 (rarely 7) (x̅ = 7.7); (3) usually 4 supralabials touching the subocular (x̅ = 3.9) vs. 2–4 (x̅ = 2.8); (4) the number of infralabials 10–12 (x̅ = 11.0) vs. usually 12–15 (x̅ = 13.0); (5) supralabials and cephalic scales strongly and broadly edged with black vs. no black borders; (6) a pale lateral stripe usually absent in females (in 18 out of 22) vs. a broad lateral stripe present; (7) each ventral pale and narrowly edged with black vs. green without black edges. T. calamitas sp. nov. differs from T. kirscheyi sp. nov. by (1) the number of subcaudals in males 75–77 (x̅ = 75.9) vs. 80–82 (x̅ = 81.5); (2) in the relative tail length of males 0.189–0.212 (x̅ = 0.201) vs. 0.212–0.221 (x̅ = 0.217); (3) in the number of cephalic scales 5–7 (x̅ =5.7)vs.7(rarely6or8)(x̅ =7.0);(4)the internasals always in contact vs. always separate; (5) the number of supralabials, 9–10 (x̅ = 9.38) vs. 10–11 (x̅ = 10.5) (6) usually 4 supralabials touching the subocular (x̅ = 3.9) vs. 2 (x̅ = 2.0); (7) the number of infralabials 10–12 (x̅ = 11.0) vs. 12–14 (x̅ = 13.0); (8) supralabials and cephalic scales strongly and broadly edged with black vs. no black borders; (9) females with a weak lateral line vs. usually without lateral line. (Vogel et al. 2022)Detailed Description of the holotype: Vogel et al. 2022.Species description and variation: Vogel et al. 2022: 64.
Trimeresurus kirscheyi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A large species of pitviper of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by the combination of (1) body elongate and quite slender, head long and massive in adults; (2) an overall green coloration, uniform and without dark crossbands; (3) a white, black or white and black ventrolateral stripe; (4) no postocular streak in both sexes; (5) 21 DSR at midbody; (6) 1st supralabial completely separated from nasal scale; (7) large internasals, separated by one large scale in all examined specimens; (8) 12–14 supralabials, only 3rd SL in contact with subocular; (9) supraoculars large but elongate, separated by 6–8 cephalic scales; (10) tail long, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.212 and 0.221 in males and 0.145 and 0.152 in females; (11) 180– 187 VEN; (12) 64–82 SC (males: 81–82; females: 64–68); (13) cephalic scales not edged with black; (14) venter pale greenish yellow, uniform; and (15) tail green as the body anteriorly, its upper surface and sides becoming quickly covered with irregular rusty brown or reddish brown blotches, progressively fused posteriorly making the tail entirely rusty brown.Comparisons: Vogel et al. 2022: 66 (x̅ not copyable)Description of the holotype: Vogel et al. 2022: 67Species description and variation: Vogel et al. 2022: 68
Trimeresurus whitteni	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A large species of pitviper of the genus Trimeresurus, characterized by the combination of (1) body elongate, head long and massive in adults; (2) an overall green coloration, with irregular areas interstitial skin black and many scales irregularly edged with black producing faint, poorly contrasted crossbands; (3) a white or white and black ventrolateral stripe; (4) a dark postocular streak in most specimens, black and black and red; (5) 21 DSR at midbody; (6) 1st supralabial totally separated from nasal scale; (7) large internasals, always in contact in all examined specimens; (8) 10–11 supralabials, 4th or 4th–5th SL in contact with subocular; (9) supraoculars large but elongate, separated by 7–8 cephalic scales; (10) tail long, with a ratio TaL/TL between 0.191 and 0.209 in males and 0.144 and 0.151 in females; (11) 178–191 VEN; (12) 63–77 SC (males: 74– 77; females: 63–67); (13) eye copper to greenish copper in life; (14) cephalic scales not edged with black; (15) a red or grey postocular streak; (16) venter green, uniform; and (17) tail green as the body anteriorly, with greyish red, salmon, rusty brown or reddish brown blotches, progressively fused posteriorly making the tail entirely red or salmon. (Vogel et al. 2022)Comparisons: Vogel et al. 2022: 70 (x̅ not copyable)Description of the holotype: Vogel et al. 2022: 70Species description and variation: Vogel et al. 2022: 72
Gloydius chambensis	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Gloydius chambensis can be identified by the number of gular scales in contact with the infralabial scales (4–5, mean 4.17), number of sublabial scales (9–10, mean 9.57) and the proportion of the first temporal scale covered by the postocular stripe (covering less than a quarter of the temporal scale). (Kuttalam et al. 2021).Comparisons: Gloydius chambensis  can be distinguished from its sister species, G. himalayanus, by the lower number of gular scales in contact with the infralabial scales (4–5, mean 4.17, compared to 5–6, mean 5.67, in G. himalayanus), a higher number of sublabial scales, r (9–10, mean 9.57, compared to 6–9, mean 7.97, in G. himalayanus) and a lower proportion of the first temporal scale covered by the postocular stripe (covering less than a quarter of the temporal scale, compared to more than a quarter in G. himalayanus). Both Gloydius chambensis sp. nov. and Gloydius himalayanus can be distinguished from all other congeneric species by a very distinct or sharp canthus rostralis, from the Gloydius halys complex by having 21 mid-body dorsal rows (vs 22 or 23 rows), from G. rubromaculatus, G. strauchi and G. huangi by having a pointed snout and triangular head (vs a blunt snout and rounded head) and from G. angusticeps and G. monticola by having a matte dorsal texture (vs a glassy texture with a metallic lustre) (Kuttalam et al. 2021).Color in life: Paired distinct dark-coloured stripes start from the posterior head scales and extend down the neck and dorsolateral surface as far as the 20th ventral scale. The postocular stripe is a thin, dark brown stripe that begins from the rear edge of the eye and continues onto the two temporal scales, impinging slightly on the last supralabial scale. The lower edge of the ocular stripe is bordered by a white line. The longer of the two ocular stripes ends in line with the 4th ventral scale. A total of 24 crossbands on the dorsal surface of the body. These are a dull mud-brown colour, with some having a darker inner border. There are also blotches all along the lateral sides of the body that are broken extensions of the crossbands. The ventral scales are glossy, with many scales having blotches with white edges on the ends of the scale, similar to those on the lateral surface. The background dorsal coloration is a dull mud-brown colour with a matte texture. The posterior half of the tail is lighter in colour (Figure 7, Kuttalam et al. 2021).
Ovophis malhotrae	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: Ovophis malhotrae sp. nov. can be distinguished from its congeners by having (1) 2nd  supralabial separated from the loreal scale; (2) 3rd supralabial larger than 4th; (3) internasal scales separated by two small  scales; (5) dorsal scales in 27-23-19 rows; (6) subcaudal scale count of 47, paired (Zeng  et al. 2023).Comparisons: Ovophis malhotrae sp. nov. can be differentiated by several characters. Ovophis malhotrae sp. nov. is distinguished from O.zayuensis by having fewer ventral scales (145 vs. 160-175) and paired subcaudal scales (vs. unpaired). The new species differs from O. convictus by exhibiting higher numbers of subcaudals (47 vs. 17-31). It is distinguished from O. monticola by having the 2nd supralabial separated from the loreal scale (vs. 2nd supralabial fused with loreal scale), the internasal scales separated by two scales (vs. the internasal scales in contact or separated by one scale). Ovophis malhotrae sp. nov. is different from O. makazayazaya and O. tonkinensis by the 3rd supralabial being larger than 4th (vs. 4th larger than 3rd supralabial), internasal scales separated by two scales (vs. internasal scales in contact or separated by one scale), and  paired subcaudal scales (vs. unpaired subcaudal scales) (Zeng et al. 2023).Color in life: Dark brown on dorsal body, with two interlaced or parallel black patches spaced on each side of the body; dark brown on the top and sides of the head, with a gradually widening orange stripe extending from the posterior eye backwards to the neck; gradually changing below head from brownish yellow to creamy yellow from the chin shields to the belly; belly of body grey-brown, scattered with light brown dots of varying sizes; small white spots on the dorsal surface of the tail (Zeng et al. 2023).
Trimeresurus ciliaris	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: A species of the genus Trimeresurus which is assigned to the subgenus Trimeresurus based on the following morphological attributes: a long papillose or calyculate hemipenis and partially fused first supralabial and nasal scales (Malhotra and Thorpe 2004a; David et al. 2011). The new species Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. can be distinguished from all other congeneric species by the following combination of morphological characters: three or four small convex supraocular scales; internasals not in contact; small scale between nasal and the scale formed by the fused second supralabial and loreal present; dorsal scales in 17–17–15 rows; ventral scales 172–175 in males, 171 in a single female; subcaudal scales 59–63 in males, 52 in a single female, all paired; in life an emerald-green dorsum with reddish-brown crossbands; creamy-white venter lacking dark dots or stripes on the lateral sides of the ventrals; iris olive-green with faded-brown horizontal stripe; tail dark brown mottled with rusty spots; white vertebral spots present in both sexes located approximately every two or three dorsal scales; dark brown spots forming discontinuous pattern present on 1–3 lateral dorsal scale rows; males having a reddish-brown postocular stripe. (IDIIATULLINA et al. 2023)Description of the holotype. Adult male (Fig. 3), specimen in a good state of preservation. Body cylindrical, long and thin (SVL 345 mm, TaL 72 mm, TL 417 mm, TaL/TL 0.17) (Fig. 3A,B). Head triangular in dorsal view (Fig. 3C), elongate, clearly distinct from the neck (HL 16.5 mm, HW 11.4 mm, HW/HL 0.69). Snout elongate, flattened and rounded in dorsal view (Fig. 3C), rather rectangular in lateral view (Fig. 3E,F), with a very distinct and sharp canthus rostralis (SnL/HL 0.30, SnL/ED 1.92). Distance between eye and nostril 3.9 mm on both sides. Rostral slightly visible in dorsal aspect, triangular (Fig. 3C). Pupil vertically elliptical, loreal pit present, triangular in shape (Fig. 3E,F). Nostril completely enclosed in nasal scale; nasal scale partially fused with first supralabial (Fig. 3E). Shield bordering the anterior edge of loreal pit fused with second supralabial. Anterior subocular long, thin, and crescent-like, separated from the 4th and 5th supralabials by one row of scales; posterior subocular ovoid, separated from the 6th supralabial by 2/1 scales (Fig. 3E, F). Three preoculars on each side of the head; two upper preoculars located above the loreal pit, elongated, in contact with the single loreal which separates them from the nasal; lower preocular forming the lower margin of the loreal pit, lower preocular in contact with third supralabial (Fig. 3E, F). A small scale between the nasal and the scale formed by the fused second supralabial and loreal; 2/2 postoculars; 9/9 supralabials, third the largest (Fig. 3E,F); 11/10 infralabials, those of the first pair in contact with each other behind the mental; the first three pairs of infralabials in contact with the single pair of chin shields (Fig. 3D). Six pairs of gulars aligned between the chin shields and the first preventral (Fig. 3D). One large pair of enlarged internasals, separated by three small scales. Three small slightly convex supraoculars, same size as or smaller than preoculars and postoculars (Fig. 3C). Scales on snout and in the interorbital region smooth, irregular, subimbricate; temporal and occipital scales moderately keeled (Fig. 3C,E,F). Dorsal scales in 17–17–15 rows. Dorsal scales all strongly keeled, except the first row, which is smooth (Fig. 3H). One preventral + 172 ventrals. Cloacal plate single; 61 subcaudals, all divided. Hemipenes long, papillose, and deeply forked with small, soft, basal spines (Fig. 3G). Each maxilla bearing a single large venom tooth; three teeth on palatine, 11 on pterygoid, and 12 on dentary. (IDIIATULLINA et al. 2023)Coloration in life (Figs 3–5). Dorsal surface of the head emerald-green with many scales partly or entirely dark red, especially on the snout, and on the interorbital, temporal and occipital regions (Fig. 3C). A reddish-brown postocular stripe extends from postocular scales to the neck (Fig. 3E,F). Black vertical pupil; iris olive-green with faded brown horizontal stripe (Fig. 3E,F). The background color of the dorsum emerald-green, similar to that of the head, with about 75 irregular, dark red cross-bands (Fig. 3A). These red bands are about two dorsal scales long mediodorsally, but getting narrower on the lower flanks where they are about 1–2 dorsal scale in length. At the level of the vertebral row, the red bands are generallyseparated by one dorsal scale. White vertebral spots present along the vertebral scale row, approximately every two or three scales (Fig. 3A). Ventrolateral stripe absent. Dark brown spots forming discontinuous pattern present on first to third lateral dorsal scale rows (Fig. 3H). Tail dark brown mottled with rusty spots. Ventral surface of the tail dark brown with white irregular bands, tail tip completely black. Infralabials greenish-white with faint brown spots (Fig. 3E,F); the ventral surfaces of the head creamy white with bluish tint (Fig. 3D); the ventral surfaces of body creamy white (Fig. 3B).In preservative the background dorsal color faded to greyish-brown, with less contrasting dark marks on the head and bands on the dorsum; the ventral color became whitish grey. (IDIIATULLINA et al. 2023)Variation: The main meristic and morphometric characters of the type series of Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. are summarized in Table 4; color variation of the type series is presented in Figures 4, 5A, 6A–B, 7B–E. All members of the type series, similarly to the holotype, show a nasal scale partially fused with the first supralabial. Head scalation of the paratypes generally agrees with that of the holotype, however male ZMMU Re-17662 has a suboculars fused in a single long crescent-shaped scale (Fig. 4B), while the two males AUP-02011 (Fig. 4C) and ZMMU Re-17663 (Fig. 4D) have four small supraoculars on each side of the head instead of three as in the holotype. Coloration of paratypes is very similar to that of the holotype; all specimens have a creamy-white belly and lack ventrolateral stripe. Female specimen QSMI 1538 has slightly lower number of subcaudals than in males (SC 52 vs. 59–63). The white vertebral spots are present both in males and in females; they are regularly spaced by two or three vertebral scales. The number of dark bands on dorsum varies from 70 to 81 among the members of the type series, without apparent sexual dimorphism. Coloration of female specimen QSMI 1538 largely faded due to preservation in formalin for seven years. (IDIIATULLINA et al. 2023)Comparisons. The new species is morphologically and phylogenetically placed within the subgenus Trimeresurus (Malhotra and Thorpe 2004a; David et al. 2011) and morphologically is overall most similar to other limestone-dwelling pitviper species, including T. kanburiensis, T. kuiburi, and T. venustus s. str., so the comparisons with these three species appear to be the most pertinent. Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. can be easily distinguished from other congeners by having: 17 midbody scale rows, three or four small supraocular scales, and a small scale between the nasal and the scale formed by the fused second supralabial and loreal. The main diagnostic characters separating Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. from these three species are summarized in Table 5. The comparison of body coloration and head scalation of these species is presented in Figures 5 and 6, respectively. From the superficially similar Trimeresurus truongsonensis Orlov, Ryabov, Vu & Ho, a member of the subgenus Viridovipera, the new species can be easily distinguished by having a long papillose and deeply forked hemipenis (vs. short spinose hemipenis) and partially fused first supralabial and nasal scales (vs. separate).In particular, Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. differs from T. kanburiensis by having: smaller maximal SVL (360 mm in male, 333 mm in female vs. 412 mm in male, 572 mm in female); lower anterior number of dorsal scale rows (17 vs. 23, rarely 21 or 22); lower number of midbody scale rows (17 vs. 19); absence of dark lateral stripe on ventrals, Fig. 5A (vs. dark lateral stripe on ventrals always present, discontinuous, olive-brown, Fig. 5B); three or four small supraocular scales, Fig. 6B (vs. single large supraocular scale, Fig. 6D); body color in life (reddish-brown bands on an emerald-green background [Fig. 5A] vs. dark olive-brown bands on olive-greyish background [Fig. 5B]); white vertebral spots present in both sexes separated by 2–3 dorsal scales vs. white vertebral spots present only in males and are separated by 3–5 dorsal scales; iris color (olive-green with faded brown horizontal stripe [Fig. 6A] vs. brown, slightly golden [Fig. 6C]); and tail color (dark brown mottled with rusty spots vs. brownish-gray with olive-brown blotches).Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. further differs from T. kuiburi by having: smaller maximal SVL in female (333 mm vs. 451 mm); internasals separated by two or three scales (vs. always in contact); lower anterior number of dorsal scale rows (17 vs. 21 rarely 23); lower number midbody scale rows (17 vs. 19); higher number of ventrals in females (172–175 vs. 164–166); ventral surfaces of body creamy-white (vs. pale-green); three or four small supraocular scales, Fig. 6A (vs. one large supraocular scale, Fig. 6F); small scale between nasal and second supralabial present vs. absent; body color in life (reddish-brown bands on emerald-green background [Fig. 5A] vs. red to purple bands on bottle-green background [Fig. 5C]); white vertebral spots present in both sexes separated by 2–3 dorsal scales vs. white vertebral dots present only in males and are separated by 5–6 dorsal scales; iris color (olive-green with faded brown horizontal stripe [Fig. 6A] vs. copper [Fig. 6E]); and tail color (dark brown mottled with rusty spots vs. red with some thin lighter bands).Trimeresurus ciliaris sp. nov. can be further differentiated from T. venustus s. str. by having: smaller maximal SVL (360 mm in male, 333 mm in female vs. 490 mm in male, 456 mm in female); lower anterior number of dorsal scale rows (17 vs. 23, rarely 21 or 25); lower number midbody scale rows (17 vs. 21, rarely 19); white vertebral spots present in both sexes separated by 2–3 dorsal scales (vs. absent); ventral surfaces creamy-white (vs. pale-green); lateral dark stripe on ventrals absent (vs. lateral dark stripe on ventrals always present, discontinuous, red); three or four small supraocular scales, Fig. 6A (vs. one large supraocular scale, Fig. 6H); small scale between nasal and second supralabial present vs. absent; body color in life (reddish-brown bands on emerald-green background [Fig. 5A] vs. red to purple bands on dark bottle-green background [Fig. 5D]); white vertebral spots present in both sexes separated by 2–3 dorsal scales vs. white vertebral dots absent in both sexes; iris color (olive-green with faded brown horizontal stripe [Fig. 6A] vs. yellowish-brown to gold [Fig. 6G]); and tail coloration (dark brown mottled with rusty spots vs. brown with dark purplish-brown crossbars).Among the other species in the subgenus Trimeresurus, the new species can be readily distinguished from T. albolabris, T. andersonii, T. cantori, T. cardamomensis, T. caudornatus, T. davidi, T. erythrurus, T. fasciatus, T. guoi, T. honsonensis, T. insularis, T. labialis, T. macrops, T. mutabilis, T. purpureomaculatus, T. rubeus, T. salazar, and T. septentrionalis by body coloration and pattern (reddish-brown bands on emerald-green background in the new species vs. uniform green or green coloration with no pattern, or pattern consisting of small brownish spots or speckles in other species, or straw-yellow background with irregular, dark-brown transverse body bands in T. honsonensis). Moreover, by having 17 MSR, the new species can be further separated from T. albolabris (21 MSR), T. andersonii (21 MSR), T. cantori (27, 29 or 31 MSR), T. cardamomensis (21 MSR), T. caudornatus (21 MSR), T. davidi (21 or 23 MSR), T. erythrurus (23 rarely 21, 25 MSR), T. fasciatus (21 MSR), T. guoi (21 MSR), T. honsonensis (21 MSR), T. insularis (21 MSR), T. labialis (21 or 23 MSR), T. macrops (21 MSR), T. mutabilis (21 MSR), T. purpureomaculatus (25 rarely 27, 29 MSR), T. rubeus (21 MSR), T. salazar (21 MSR), and T. septentrionalis (21 MSR) (see Gumprecht et al. 2004; Grismer et al. 2008; Malhotra et al. 2011; Chandramouli et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020, 2021; Mirza et al. 2020; our data). (IDIIATULLINA et al. 2023)Comparisons (ciliaris, kuiburi, venustus, kanburiensis): IDIIATULLINA et al. 2023: 709 (Table 5).
Trimeresurus uetzi	Serpentes	Viperidae	Diagnosis: this species is recognized by (1) dorsal colouration grass-green or deep green with faint transverse dark bands across the dorsum; (2) venter uniform yellowish-green; (3) side of the head grass-green or deep green above the level of the lower margin of eyes, yellowish-green below; (4) white postocular stripe present males; (5) in males, a yellowish-green ventrolateral stripe present, narrow, only extending on the outermost row of dorsal scales; stripe absent in females; (6) iris copper in male or green gold in female; (7) first supralabial not fused with nasal scale or barely fused with a suture visible; (8) cephalic scales feebly keeled; (9) dorsal scales arranged in 21–21–15 rows, moderately keeled except the outermost rows; (10) ventral scales: 154–171 in males, 157–171 in females; (11) subcaudal scales: 61–71 in males, 50–55 in females; (11) hemipenes short, reaching only the 6th–8th subcaudals when everted or in situ, covered with relatively weak and sparse papillae. (Vogel et al. 2023)Description of the holotype (Fig. 2).Morphology. Body cylindrical, long, and thin (SVl 472 mm, tal 119 mm, tl 591 mm, ratio tal/tl 0.20). Head triangular in dorsal view, elongate, clearly distinct from the neck (Hl 23.6 mm, HW 13.5 mm, HW/Hl 1.75), snout elongate, flattened, and rounded when seen from above, rather rectangular when seen from lateral side, with a very distinct and sharp canthus rostralis; loreal pit present. Eye average (ED 3.12 mm, EN 4.85 mm, ratio ED/SN 0.65); pupil vertically elliptic.Body scalation. Dorsal scales in 21–21–15 rows; dorsal scales all moderately keeled, except the first row of which scales are smooth; 167 ventrals (plus 2 preventrals); cloacal plate single; 69 subcaudals, all divided.Head scalation. rostral slightly visible from above, triangular; one large pair of enlarged internasals, in contact each with the other; nostril completely included in nasal scale; nasal scale partially fused with the first supralabial, separated by a suture present behind the nostril, but not present anteriorly; foveal scale bordering the anterior edge of the pit fused with the second supralabial; a small scale between the nasal and the foveal; scales on the upper snout surface and in the interorbital region smooth, irregular, barely imbricate; temporal and occipital scales moderately keeled. two elongate upper preoculars above the loreal pit; lower preocular forming the lower margin of the loreal pit. one supraocular on each side, large, broader than the internasals; 10 irregular cephalic scales (Cep) between the supraoculars; one long, thin, crescent-like subocular scale; 10/11 supralabials, third largest and in contact with the subocular, 4th and 5th supralabials separated from subocular by one row of scales, 6th supralabial separated by 2/2 scales; 2/2 postoculars; 12/12 infralabials, those of the first pair in contact with each other behind the mental, the first three pairs in contact with the single pair of chin shields. Five pairs of gulars aligned between the chin shields and the 1st preventral.Hemipenis. the organ is relatively short, thin, papillose, deeply forked with small, soft, basal spines, reaching only the 6th SC. (Vogel et al. 2023)Coloration in preservative (Fig. 2): Body dark greyish-brown above with faint darker dorsal crossbands due to regular areas of darker skin, uniform pale greenish-blue on its lower sides; a white, conspicuous ventrolateral stripe extends on the 1st dorsal scale row from the neck to the base of the tail. Ventral surface uniform pale yellowish-green. the dorsal surface of the tail is like that of the body or slightly more blue. the head is dark greyish-brown on its dorsal and upper lateral surfaces; rostral and nasal scale dark greyish-brown; upper part of 1st supralabial cream; a cream-colored streak extends along the head from the lower edge of the loreal pit to the lower margin of the eye, the subocular scale, the upper part of the 3rd supralabial and the scales separating the supralabials from the subocular; behind the level of the head, a thicker and more conspicuous postocular streak extends from the posterior margin of the eye to the corner of the mouth and behind where it connects with the ventrolateral stripe; supralabials dark greenish-blue, irregularly mottled with greenish-yellow; the dark and paler colors of the sides of the head are sharply separated by the white lateral streak. the chin and throat are uniform creamish-yellow but mental scales and first infralabials ornate with dark greenish-blue.According to CAS staff, no photographs of living specimens of the type series of Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. were taken. (Vogel et al. 2023)Variation (see table 1 and Fig. 3 for the details). the longest known specimen is 811 mm long (SVl 689 mm, tal 122 mm, female; CAS 235954). the longest known male is 591 mm long (SVl 472 mm, tal 119 mm; CAS 243024). ratio tal/tl: 0.141–0.222 (males: 0.161–0.222, females: 0.141–0.157).Body scalation. 21(rarely 19, 22 or 23) – 21(rarely 19) – 15 (rarely 13) DSr; 154–172 VEN, without sexual dimorphism; 50–71 SC (males: 60–71, females: 50–55); total VEN+SC: 209–240 (males: 216–240, females: 209– 223).Head scalation. InSep: none, internasals in contact in all known specimens; Cep: 9–10; Sl: 10–12 (exceptionally 9); Il: 11–14.Main characters of pattern. Postocular streak always present, white, thick, and conspicuous in males, absent or white, thin and faint; ventrolateral stripe always present, white and conspicuous in males, absent or white, thin in females.Hemipenis. the organ is relatively short, thin, papillose, deeply forked with small, soft, basal spines, reaching only the 6th–8th SC (based on two specimens, namely the holotype CAS 243024 and specimen CAS 243005, paratype).Coloration in life (Fig. 4). the description is based on photographs of males of the species Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. from Myanmar via Native Species Conservation and Identification in Myanmar (https:/www.facebook.com/ groups/nscimy) and photos published in Leviton et al. (2003, 2008). the upper head surface and temporal regions are of the same color than dorsal surface; supralabials paler than the body; postocular streak in male always white ore cream (absent in female); white ventrolateral stripe well developed, highly contrasted, covering approximately two-third of the height of the first dorsal scale row, increasing in width towards the head in male; ventrolateral stripe at best thin in females. the venter, chin and throat are uniformly yellowish-green but paler than the body. Iris copper in males or greenish-gold in females.Comparisons. We summarize in table 2 the main characters separating Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. from the other twelve species of the complex of Trimeresurus albolabris-septentrionalis. More specifically, the comparisons with these species are as follows:Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. is distinguished from T. albolabris sensu stricto (restricted to southern China, northern Vietnam and central laos) by having: (1) hemipenes short, reaching only the 6th–8th SC vs. reaching the 15th–18th SC in T. albolabris; (2) higher mean number of ventral scales (163.27 ± 5.61 in males, 164.14 ± 3.84 in females vs. 154.93 ± 4.67 in males, 158.80 ± 4.78 in females, respectively); (3) greater mean total numbers of ventral scales plus subcaudals in males (230.4 ± 7.88 vs. 218.00 ± 11.04); (4) no small scale between the nasal and the pit vs. one or two small scales usually present; and (5) postocular streak paler and wider covering 2–3 scales in males vs. thinner, covering 1–2 scales. Furthermore, T. uetzi sp. nov. is widely separated from T. albolabris sensu stricto on a geographical basis as this latter species inhabits only south-eastern China, northern Vietnam and central laos. Moreover, the ranges of both species are separated by that of Trimeresurus guoi.Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. is distinguished from T. caudornatus by having: (1) tip of hemipenes reaching the 6th–8th SC vs. 37th–38th SC; (2) postocular stripe present in males vs. absent; (3) ventrolateral body stripe present, white, conspicuous vs. faint, greenish-yellow, poorly contrasted; (4) in life, iris copper in male vs. golden yellow in male; and (5) no median stripe on the lower surface of the tail vs. an irregular, red-orange stripe in the middle of the ventral surface present.Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. is distinguished from T. guoi by having: (1) hemipenes reaching the 6th–8th SC vs. the 23rd–32nd SC; (2) ventrolateral stripes present in males and often in females vs. absent in both sexes; (3) a postocular stripe present in males vs. absent; and (4) in life, iris copper in male vs. firebrick-red or deep red in male.Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. is distinguished from T. salazar by having: (1) hemipenes reaching the 6th–8th SC vs. 12th–13th SC; (2) postocular streak white vs. bicolor (red and white); (3) ventrolateral stripe white vs. stripe bicolor (red and white); and (4) lower total numbers of ventral scales and subcaudals in females 216.08 ± 3.99 vs. 227.33 ± 3.79.Trimeresurus uetzi sp. nov. is distinguished from T. septentrionalis sensu stricto, restricted to western and central Himalayan regions of Nepal and northern India, two species previously largely confused, by having: (1) lower total of ventral scales and subcaudals (230.4 ± 7.88 in males, 216.08 ± 3.99 in females vs. 241.67 ± 7.76 in males, 231.79 ± 3.68 in females of T. septentrionalis); (2) white postocular streak wide and conspicuous, covering 2–3 scales in males vs. usually absent or thin and pale, covering 1 scale; and (3) in life, eye copper in male vs. yellowish-green in male. (Vogel et al. 2023)
